Part One 
AT CHRISTMAS, SOMETIMES THE DEVIL CHILD IS BORN




Chapter One
THE DISCOVERER OF THINGS


We were strolling down the street hand in hand, in no hurry at all. Totoca was  teaching  me  about  life.  And  that  made  me  really  happy,  my  big brother holding my hand and teaching me things. But teaching me things out in the world. Because at home I learned by discovering things on my own and doing things on my own; I’d make mistakes and because I made mistakes I always ended up getting beaten. Until not long before that, no one had ever hit me. But then they heard things and started saying I was the devil, a demon, a sandy-haired sprite. I didn’t want to know about it. If  I  wasn’t  outside,  I’d  have  started  to  sing.  Singing  was  pretty.  Totoca knew how to do something besides sing: he could whistle. But no matter how  hard  I  tried  to  copy  him,  nothing  came  out.  He  cheered  me  up  by saying  it  was  normal,  that  I  didn’t  have  a  whistler’s  mouth  yet.  But because I couldn’t sing on the outside, I sang on the inside. It was weird at first, but then it felt really nice. And I was remembering a song Mother used to sing when  I was  really little.  She’d be  standing at  the washtub, with  a  cloth  tied  about  her  head  to  keep  the  sun  off  it.  With  an  apron around her  waist,  she’d  spend  hours  and hours  plunging  her  hands  into the water, turning soap into lots of suds. Then she’d wring out the clothes and take them to the clothes line, where she’d peg them all out and hoist it  up  high.  She  did  the  same  thing  with  all  the  clothes.  She  washed clothes from Dr Faulhaber’s house to help with the household expenses. Mother was tall and thin, but very beautiful. She was brown from the sun and  her  hair  was  straight  and  black.  When  she  didn’t  tie  it  up,  it  hung down to her waist. But the most beautiful thing was when she sang, and I’d hang around, learning.

	Sailor, sailor
	Sailor of sorrow
	Because of you
	I’ll die tomorrow …

	The waves crashed
	Dashed on sand
	Off he went
	My sailor man …

	A sailor’s love
	Lasts not a day
	His ship weighs anchor
	And sails away …

	The waves crashed …

That song had always filled me with a sadness I couldn’t understand.
	Totoca gave me a tug. I came to my senses.
	‘What’s up, Zezé?’
	‘Nothing. I was singing.’
	‘Singing?’
	‘Yeah.’
	‘Then I must be going deaf.’
	Didn’t he know you could sing on the inside? I kept quiet. If he didn’t know, I wasn’t going to teach him.
	We had come to the edge of the Rio–São Paulo Highway.
	On it, there was everything. Trucks, cars, carts and bicycles.
	‘Look, Zezé, this is important. First we take a good look one way, and then the other. Now go.’
	We ran across the highway.
	‘Were you scared?’
	I was, but I shook my head.
	‘Let’s do it again together. Then I want to see if you’ve learned.’
	We ran back.
	‘Now you go. No baulking, ’cause you’re a big kid now.’
	My heart beat faster.
	‘Now. Go.’
	I  raced  across,  almost  without  breathing. I  waited  a  bit and  he  gave me the signal to return.
	‘You did really well for the first time. But you forgot something. You have to look both ways to see if any cars are coming. I won’t always be here to give you the signal. We’ll practise some more on the way home.But let’s go now, ’cause I want to show you something.’
	He  took  my  hand  and  off  we  went  again,  slowly.  I  couldn’t  stop thinking about a conversation I’d had.
	‘Totoca.’
	‘What?’
	‘Can you feel the age of reason?’
	‘What’s this nonsense?’
	‘Uncle Edmundo said it. He said I was “precocious” and that soon I’d reach the age of reason. But I don’t feel any different.’
	‘Uncle Edmundo is a fool. He’s always putting things in that head of yours.’
	‘He isn’t a fool. He’s wise. And when I grow up I want to be wise and a poet and wear a bow tie. One day I’m going to have my picture taken in a bow tie.’
	‘Why a bow tie?’
	‘Because  you  can’t  be  a  poet  without  a  bow  tie.  When  Uncle Edmundo  shows  me  pictures  of  poets  in  the  magazine,  they’re  all wearing bow ties.’
	‘Zezé,  you  have  to  stop  believing  everything  he  tells  you.  Uncle Edmundo’s a bit cuckoo. He lies a bit.’
	‘Is he a son of a bitch?’
	‘You’ve  already  been  slapped  across  the  mouth  for  using  so  many swear words! Uncle Edmundo isn’t that. I said “cuckoo”. A bit crazy.’
	‘You said he was a liar.’
	‘They’re two completely different things.’
	‘No,  they’re  not.  The  other  day,  Father  was  talking  about  Labonne with Severino, the one who plays cards with him, and he said, “That old son  of  a  bitch  is  a  bloody  liar.”  And  no  one  slapped  him  across  the mouth.’
	‘It’s OK for grown-ups to say things like that.’
	Neither of us a spoke for a moment.
	‘Uncle Edmundo isn’t … What does cuckoo mean again, Totoca?’
	He pointed his finger at his head and twisted it around.
	‘No,  he  isn’t.  He’s  really  nice.  He  teaches  me  things,  and  he  only smacked me once and it wasn’t hard.’
	Totoca started.
	‘He smacked you? When?’
	‘When I was really naughty and Glória sent me to Gran’s house. He wanted  to  read  the  newspaper  but  he  couldn’t  find  his  glasses.  He searched high and low, and he was really mad. He asked Gran where they were but she had no idea. The two of them turned the house upside down.Then I said I knew where they were and if he gave me some money to buy  marbles,  I’d tell  him.  He  went  to  his  waistcoat  and took  out  some money.
	“Go get them and I’ll give it to you.”
	‘I went to the clothes hamper and got them. And he said, “It was you, you  little  rascal!”  He  gave  me  a  smack  on  the  back side  and  put  the money away.’
	Totoca laughed.
	‘You go there to avoid getting smacked at home and you get smacked there. Let’s go a bit faster or we’ll never get there.’
	I was still thinking about Uncle Edmundo.
	‘Totoca, are children retired?’
	‘What?’
	‘Uncle Edmundo doesn’t do anything, and he gets money. He doesn’t work, and City Hall pays him every month.’
	‘So what?’
	‘Well, children don’t do anything. They eat, sleep and get money from their parents.’
	‘Retired is different, Zezé. A retired person has already worked for along  time,  their  hair’s  turned  white  and  they  walk  slowly  like  Uncle Edmundo.  But  let’s  stop  thinking  about  difficult  things.  If  you  want  to learn things from him, fine. But not with me. Act like the other boys. You can even swear, but stop filling your head with difficult things. Otherwise I won’t go out with you again.’
	I  sulked  a  bit  and  didn’t  want  to  talk  any  more. I didn’t feel  like singing either. The little bird that sang inside me had flown away.
	We stopped and Totoca pointed at the house.
	‘There it is. Like it?’
	It was an ordinary house. White with blue windows. All closed up and quiet.
	‘Yeah. But why do we have to move here?’
	‘It’s good to stay on the move.’
	We stood gazing through the fence at a mango tree on one side and atamarind tree on the other.
	‘You’re  such  a  busy body,  but  you  have  no  idea  what’s  going  on  at home. Father’s out of a job, isn’t he? It’s been six months since he had the  fight  with  Mr  Scottfield  and  they  kicked  him  out.  Did  you  know Lalá’s  working at  the factory  now? And  Mother’s going  to work  in the city, at the English Mill? Well there you go, silly. It’s all to save up to pay the rent on this new house. Father’s a good eight months behind on the other one. You’re too young to have to worry about such sad things. But I’m going to have to help out at mass, to pitch in at home.’
	He stood there a while in silence.
	‘Totoca,  are  they  going  to  bring  the  black  panther  and  the  two lionesses here?’
	‘Of course. And old slave-boy here is going to have to take apart the chicken coop.’
	He gave me a kind of sweet, pitiful look.
	‘I’m  the  one  who’s  going  to  take  down  the  zoo  and  reassemble  it here.’
	I  was  relieved.  Because  otherwise  I’d  have  to  come  up  with something new to play with my littlest brother, Luís.
	‘So, you see how I’m your friend, Zezé? Now it wouldn’t hurt for you to tell me how you did “it” …’
	‘I swear, Totoca, I don’t know. I really don’t.’
	‘You’re lying. You studied with someone.’
	‘I  didn’t  study  anything. No  one  taught  me.  Unless  it  was  the  devil who taught me in my sleep. Jandira says he’s my god father.’
	Totoca was puzzled. He even rapped me across the head a few times to try to get me to tell him. But I didn’t know how I’d done it.
	‘No one learns that kind of thing on their own.’
	But  he  was  at  a  loss  for  words  because  no  one  had  actually  seen anyone teach me anything. It was a mystery.
I remembered what had happened a week earlier. It had left the family in a flap. It had started at Gran’s house, when I sat next to Uncle Edmundo, who was reading the newspaper.
	‘Uncle.’
	‘What is it, son?’
	He moved his glasses to the tip of his nose, as all grown-ups do when they get old.
	‘When did you learn to read?’
	‘At around six or seven years of age.’
	‘Can five-year-olds learn to read?’
	‘I suppose so. But  no one likes  to teach them because  it’s  really too young.’
	‘How did you learn to read?’
	‘Like everyone else, with first readers. Going “B plus A makes BA”.’
	‘Does everyone have to learn like that?’
	‘As far as I know, they do.’
	‘Absolutely everyone?’
	He looked at me, intrigued.
	‘Look, Zezé, that’s how everyone learns. Now let me finish reading. Go look for guavas in the backyard.’
	He  pushed  his  glasses  back  up  his  nose  and  tried  to  concentrate  on reading. But I didn’t leave.
	‘What a shame!’
	It  was  such  a  heartfelt  exclamation  that  he  moved  his  glasses  back down his nose.
	‘I’ll be darned. You’re persistent, aren’t you?’
	‘It’s just that I walked all the way over here just to tell you something, sir.’
	‘OK then, tell me.’
	‘No. Not like that. First I need to know when your next pension day is.’
	‘Day after tomorrow,’ he said with a little smile, studying me.
	‘And what day is after tomorrow?’
	‘Friday.’
	‘Well, on Friday could you bring me a Silver King from the city?’
	‘Slow down, Zezé. What’s a Silver King?’
	‘It’s  the  little  white  horse  I  saw  at  the  cinema.  Its  owner  is  Fred Thompson. It’s a trained horse.’
	‘You want me to bring you a little horse on wheels?’
	‘No, sir. I want the sort with a wooden head and reins. That you stick a  tail  on  and  run  around.  I  need  to  practise  because  later  I’m  going  to work in films.’
	He laughed.
	‘I see. And if I do, what’s in it for me?’
	‘I’ll do something for you, sir.’
	‘You’ll give me a kiss?’
	‘I’m not big on kisses.’
	‘A hug?’
	I  looked  at  Uncle  Edmundo  and  felt  really  sorry  for  him.  The  little bird inside me said something. And I remembered what I’d heard people say so many times, that Uncle Edmundo was separated from his wife and had five children. But he lived all on his own and walked so slowly … Maybe  he  walked  slowly  because  he  missed  his  children?  And  his children never came to visit him.
	I walked around the table and hugged him tight. I felt his white hair brush my forehead. It was really soft.
	‘This isn’t for the horse. What I’m going to do is something else. I’m going to read.’
	‘Come again, Zezé? You can read? Who taught you?’
	‘No one.’
	‘You’re lying.’
	I backed away and from the doorway I said, ‘Bring me my horse on Friday and you’ll see if I can read or not!’
	Later, when it  was night time and  Jandira lit the  lantern because the power  company  had cut  off  the  electricity  because  the  bill  hadn’t  been paid, I  stood  on tiptoes  to  see  the ‘star’. It  was  a  picture of  a  star  on a piece of paper with a prayer underneath it to protect the house.
	‘Jandira, can you pick me up? I’m going to read that.’
	‘Enough with the tall tales, Zezé. I’m busy.’
	‘Pick me up and I’ll show you.’
	‘Look, Zezé, if you’re up to something, you’ll be in trouble.’
	She picked me up and took me behind the door.
	‘Go on, then, read. This I want to see.’
	Then I read, for real. I read the prayer that asked the heavens to bless and protect the house and to ward off evil spirits.
	Jandira put me down. Her mouth was open.
	‘Zezé, you memorized that. You’re tricking me.’
	‘I swear, Jandira. I can read everything.’
	‘No  one  reads  without  having  learned  to.  Was  it  Uncle  Edmundo? Gran?’
	‘No one.’
	She went to fetch a page from the newspaper and I read it without any mistakes.  She  gave  a  little  shriek  and  called  Glória.  Glória  became nervous and  went  to  get Alaíde.  In  ten  minutes, a  crowd  of  neighbours had gathered to see the phenomenon.

That was what Totoca wanted me to tell him.
	‘He taught you and promised you the horse if you learned.’
	‘It’s not true.’
	‘I’m going to ask him.’
	‘Go  ahead.  I  don’t  know how  to  explain  it,  Totoca.  If I  did, I’d  tell you.’
	‘Then let’s go. You’ll see. When you need something …
	’He  grabbed  my  hand  angrily  and  began  to  drag  me  home.  Then  he thought of something to get revenge.
	Serves you right! You learned too soon, silly. Now you’ll have to start school in February.’
	It had been Jandira’s idea. That way the house would be peaceful all morning long and I’d learn some manners.
	‘Let’s practise crossing the highway again. Don’t think that when you go to school I’ll be your nanny, taking you across all the time. If you’re so clever, you can learn this too.’

***

‘Here’s the horse. Now, let’s see this.’
	He  opened  the  newspaper  and  showed  me  a  sentence in  an  ad  for  a medicine.
	‘In all good pharmacies and drugstores,’ I read.
	Uncle Edmundo went to get Gran from the backyard
	‘Mother. He even read “pharmacies” correctly.’
	They both started giving me things to read and I read everything.
	Gran started muttering that all was lost.
	Uncle Edmundo gave me the horse and I hugged him again. Then he held my chin and, in a wavering voice, said, ‘You’re going to go far, you little monkey. It’s no accident your  name’s  José. You’ll be the  sun, and the stars will shine around you.’
	I didn’t get it, and wondered if he really was a bit cuckoo.
	‘That’s something you don’t understand. It’s the story of Joseph. I’ll tell you when you’re a bit bigger.’
	I  was  crazy  about  stories.  The  harder  they  were,  the  more  I  liked them.
	I patted my little horse for a long time and then I looked up at Uncle Edmundo  and  said,  ‘Do  you  think  I’ll  be  a  bit  bigger  by  next  week, Uncle?’



Chapter Two
A CERTAIN SWEET-ORANGE TREE


In our family, each older sibling brought up a younger one. Jandira had taken care of Glória and another sister who’d been given away to have a proper upbringing in the north. Totoca was Jandira’s little darling. ThenLalá had taken care of me until not long ago. For as long as she liked me.Then I think she got sick of me or fell madly in love with her boyfriend, who was a dandy with baggy trousers and a short jacket just like the one in the song. When  they used to  take me for a  ‘promenade’ (that’s whather  boyfriend  called  a  stroll)  on  Sundays,  he’d  buy  me  some  really yummy  sweets  so  I  wouldn’t  tell  anyone.  I  couldn’t  even  ask  Uncle Edmundo what ‘promenade’ meant or the whole family would find out.
	My  other  two  siblings  had  died  young  and  I  had  only  heard  about them.  They  say  they  were  two  little  Apinajé  Indians,  very  dark,  with straight  black  hair.  That’s  why  they  were  given  Indian  names.  The  girl was called Aracy and the boy, Jurandyr.
	Then  came  my  little  brother  Luís.  Glória  was  the  one  who  looked after him the most, then me. He didn’t even need looking after, because there wasn’t a cuter, quieter, better-behaved boy in the world.
	That’s why when he spoke in that little voice of his without a single mistake, as I was heading out into the street, I changed my mind.
	‘Zezé, are  you  going  to  take  me  to the  zoo?  It  doesn’t look  like  it’sgoing to rain today, does it?’
	How adorable. He spoke so well. That boy was going to be someone; he was going to go far.
	I looked at the beautiful day with the sky all blue and didn’t have the courage  to  lie.  Because  sometimes,  if  I  wasn’t  in  the  mood,  I’d  say, ‘You’re out of your mind, Luís. Just look at the storm coming!’
	This time I took his little hand and we went out for our adventure in the backyard.
	The  backyard  was  divided  into  three  games.  One  was  the  zoo. Another  was  Europe,  which  was  over  by  Julio’s  neat  little  fence.  Why Europe?  Not  even  my  little  bird  knew.  We  played  Sugarloaf  Mountaincable  cars  there.  We’d  take  the  box  of  buttons  and  put  them  all  on  a string. (Uncle Edmundo called it twine. I thought twine were pigs, but he explained that pigs were swine.) Then we’d tie one end to the fence and the other to Luís’s fingertips. We’d push all the buttons up to the top and let  them  go  slowly,  one  by  one.  Each  cable  car  was  full  of  people  we knew.  There  was  a  really  black  one,  which  was  Biriquinho’s.  It  wasn’t unusual to hear a voice coming from over the fence, ‘Are you damaging my fence, Zezé?’
	‘No, Dona Dimerinda. See for yourself, ma’am.’
	‘Now, that’s what I like to see. Playing nicely with your brother. Isn’t it better like that?’
	It might have been nice, but when my ‘godfather’ the devil gave me an udge, there was nothing better than getting up to mischief …
	‘Are you going to give me a calendar for Christmas, like last year?’
	‘What did you do with the one I gave you?’
	‘You  can  go  inside  and  see,  Dona  Dimerinda.  It’s  above  the  bag  of bread.’
	She laughed and promised she would. Her husband worked at Chico Franco’s general store.

The other game was Luciano. At first Luís was really scared of him and would tug on my trousers, asking to leave. But Luciano was my friend. Whenever he saw me, he’d screech loudly. Glória wasn’t happy about it either, and said that bats were vampires that sucked children’s blood.
	‘It’s not true, Gló. Luciano isn’t like that. He’s my friend. He knows me.’
	‘You and your critter mania, talking to things …’
	It was hard work convincing Luís that Luciano wasn’t a critter. To us, Luciano was a plane flying at the Campo dos Afonsos air base.
	‘Look, Luís.’
	And Luciano would fly happily around us as if he understood what we were saying. And he did.
	‘He’s an aeroplane. He’s doing …’
	I’d  stop.  I  had  to  get  Uncle  Edmundo  to  tell  me  that  word  again.  I didn’t  know  if  it  was  ‘acorbatics’,  ‘acrobatics’  or  ‘arcobatics’.  One of those. But I couldn’t teach my little brother the wrong word.

But now he wanted the zoo.
	We  got  quite  close  to  the  old  chicken  coop.  Inside  it,  the  two  fair-feathered hens were pecking at the ground, and the old black one was so tame that we could even scratch her head.
	‘First let’s buy our tickets. Hold my hand, ’cause it’s easy for children to get lost in this crowd. See how busy it gets on Sundays?’
	Luís  would  look  around,  see  people  everywhere,  and  hold  my  hand tightly.
	At  the  ticket  office  I  stuck  my  belly  out  and  cleared  my  throat  to sound  important.  I  put  my  hand  in  my  pocket  and  asked  the  woman, ‘Until what age is entry free?’
	‘Five.’
	‘So just one adult then, please.’
	I took two orange-tree leaves as tickets and we went in.
	‘First,  son,  you’re  going  to  see  how  beautiful  the  birds  are.  Look, parrots,  parakeets  and  macaws  of  every  colour.  Those  ones  over  there with the colourful feathers are scarlet macaws.’
	His eyes bulged with delight.
	We strolled about, looking at everything. We saw so many things thatI  even  noticed  Glória  and  Lalá  behind  everything  else,  sitting  on  the bench  peeling  oranges.  Lalá  was  eyeing  me  …  Could  they  have  found out? If they had, that zoo visit was going to end with a big paddling on someone’s rear. And that someone could only be me.
	‘What’s next, Zezé, what are we going to see now?’
	I cleared my throat again and resumed my posture.
	‘Let’s go and see the monkeys. Uncle Edmundo calls them simians.’
	We bought a few bananas and threw them to the monkeys. We knew it wasn’t allowed,  but the  guards had  their hands  too full  with such a big crowd.
	‘Don’t get too close or they’ll throw banana peel at you, pipsqueak.’
	‘I really want to see the lions.’
	‘We can go in a minute.’
	I shot another look over to where the two other ‘simians’ were eating oranges. I’d be able to hear what they were talking about from the lions’ cage.
	‘Here we are.’
	I  pointed  at  the  two  yellow,  very  African  lionesses.  Luís  said  he wanted to pat the black panther’s head.
	‘Are you out of your mind, pipsqueak? The black panther is the most terrible animal in the zoo. She was brought here because she’d bitten off and eaten eighteen tamers’ arms.’
	Luís looked scared and pulled back his arm in fright.
	‘Did she come from a circus?’
	‘Yes.’
	‘Which circus, Zezé? You never told me that before.’
	I thought and thought. Who did I know who had a name for a circus?
	‘Ah! She came from the Rozemberg Circus.’
	‘Isn’t that a bakery?’
	It was getting harder and harder to trick him. He was growing smart.
	‘That too.  We  should  sit down  and have  our lunch.  We’ve walked a lot.’
	We  sat down and  pretended to be  eating. But my ears  were pricked, listening to what my sisters were saying.
	‘We should learn from him, Lalá. Look how patient he is with Luís.’
	‘Yes, but Luís doesn’t do what he does. It’s evil, not mischief.’
	‘So he’s got the devil in his blood, but he’s so funny. No one on the street can stay angry at him, no matter what he gets up to …’
	‘He’s not passing me without getting a paddling. One day he’ll learn.’
	I  shot  an  arrow  of  pity  into  Glória’s  eyes.  She  always  came  to  my rescue and I always promised her I wouldn’t do it again.
	‘Later. Not now. They’re playing so quietly.’
	She  already  knew  everything.  She  knew  that  I’d  gone  through  the ditch into Dona Celina’s backyard. I’d been fascinated by the clothes lineswinging a bunch of arms and legs in the wind. Then the devil told me that  I  could  make  all  those  arms  and  legs  come  tumbling  down  at  the same time. I agreed that it would be really funny. I found a piece of sharp glass in the ditch, climbed up the orange tree and patiently cut the line. I almost fell down with it. There was a cry and people came running.
	‘Help, the line snapped.’
	But a voice coming from I don’t know where yelled even louder.
	‘It was Seu Paulo’s kid, the little pest. I saw him climbing the orange tree with a piece of glass.’

* * *

‘Zezé?’
	‘What, Luís?’
	‘How do you know so much about zoos?’
	‘I’ve been to a lot of them.’
	It  was  a  lie.  Everything  I  knew,  Uncle  Edmundo  had  told  me.  He’d even promised to take me to the zoo one day. But he  walked so slowly that by the time we arrived, it wouldn’t even be there anymore. Totoca had been once with Father.
	‘My favourite is the one on Rua Barão de Drummond, in Vila Isabel. Do you know  who the Baron of  Drummond was? Of  course you don’t. You’re too young to know these things. The Baron must have been really chummy with God. Because he was the one who helped God invent the lottery game that they sell tickets for in the Misery and Hunger bar, and the zoo. When you’re older …’
	My sisters were still there.
	‘When I’m older what?’
	‘Boy,  do  you  ask  a  lot  of  questions.  When  you’re  old  enough,  I’ll teach  you  the  lottery  animals  and  their  numbers.  Up  to  twenty.  From twenty to twenty-five, I know there’s a cow, a bull, a bear, a deer and a tiger. I don’t know what order they’re in, but I’m going to learn so I don’t teach you the wrong thing.’
	He was growing tired of the game.
	‘Zezé, sing “The Little House” for me.’
	‘Here at the zoo? There’s too many people.’
	‘No. We’ve left already.’
	‘It’s really long. I’ll just sing the bit you like.’
	I knew it was the part about the cicadas. I filled my lungs.

	I live in a house
	atop a hill
	down which
	an orchard spills.
	A little house
	where one can see
	far far off
	the sea.

I skipped a few verses.

	Among strange palms
	cicadas sing psalms.
	The sun sets
	with golden sails.
	In the garden,
	a nightingale.

	I stopped. My sisters were still sitting there waiting for me. I had an idea: I’d sing until night fall. I’d outlast them.
	No  such  luck.  I  sang  the  whole  song,  repeated  it,  then  I  sang  ‘For Your  Fleeting  Love’  and  even  ‘Ramona’.  The  two different versions  of ‘Ramona’  that  I  knew  …  but  they  didn’t  budge.  Then  I  got  desperate. Better to get it over and done with. I went over to Lalá.
	‘Go ahead, give it to me.’
	I turned around and offered her my bum, clenching my teeth because Lalá was heavy-handed with the slipper.

* * *

It was Mother’s idea.
	‘Today we’re all going to see the house.’
	Totoca  took  me  to  one  side  and  told  me  in  a  whisper,  ‘If  you  tell anyone we’ve already been there, you’ve got it coming.’
	But it hadn’t even occurred to me.
	A whole crowd of us set off down the street. Glória held my hand and had orders not to let me out of her sight for one minute. And I held Luís’s hand.
	‘When do we have to move, Mother?’ asked Glória.
	‘Two  days  after  Christmas  we  have  to  start  packing  our  stuff,’  said Mother, somewhat sadly.
	She sounded so tired. I felt really sorry for her. Mother had worked allher life. She’d been working since the age of six, when the factory was built. They would sit her on a table and she’d have to clean and dry tools. She was so tiny that she’d wet herself on the table because she couldn’t get down by herself. That’s why she never went to school or learned to read and write. When she told me, I was so sad I promised that when I was a poet and wise, I’d read her my poems.
	Signs  of  Christmas  were  appearing  in  the  shops  and  stores.  Father Christmas had been drawn on every pane of glass. People were already buying cards to avoid the rush closer to the time. I had a vague hope that this time the Baby Jesus would be born in my heart. At any rate, maybe I’d improve a bit when I reached the age of reason.
	‘This is it.’
	Everyone loved it. The house was a little smaller. With Totoca’s help, Mother untwisted a piece of wire that was holding the gate shut and there was  a  stampede.  Glória  let  go  of  my  hand  and  forgot  that  she  was becoming a young lady. She raced over to the mango tree and flung her arms around it.
	‘The mango tree’s mine. I got here first.’
	Totoca did the same with the tamarind tree.
	Nothing was left for me. I looked at Glória, almost crying.
	‘What about me, Gló?’
	‘Run around the back. There must be more trees, silly.’
	I ran, but I only found long grass, and a bunch of thorny old orange trees. Next to the ditch was a small sweet-orange tree.
	I was disappointed. They were all going through the house claiming bedrooms.
	I tugged on Glória’s skirt.
	‘There was nothing else.’
	‘You  don’t  know how  to look  properly.  Just  wait  a  minute.  I’ll  findyou a tree.’
	And soon she came with me. She examined the orange trees.
	‘Don’t you like that one? It’s a fine tree.’
	I  didn’t  like  this  one,  or  that  one,  or  any  of  them.  They  all  had  too many thorns.
	‘I prefer the sweet-orange tree to those ugly things.’
	‘Where?’
	I took her to see it.
	‘But what a lovely little orange tree! It doesn’t have a single thorn. It has so much personality that you can tell it’s a sweet-orange tree from far off. If I were your size, I wouldn’t want anything else.’
	‘But I want a big tree.’
	‘Think about it, Zezé. This one’s still young. It’s going to grow big –you’ll  grow  together.  You’ll  understand  each  other  like  brothers.  Have you seen that branch? It’s the only one, it’s true, but it looks a bit like ahorse made just for you.’
	I was feeling really hard done by. It reminded me of the Scotch bottle with  angels  on  it  that  we’d  seen  once.  Lalá  had  said,  ‘That  one’s  me.’ Glória  picked  one  for  her  and  Totoca  took  one  for  himself.  But  what about me? I ended up being the little head behind all the others, almost wingless. The fourth Scottish angel that wasn’t even a whole angel … Iwas  always  last.  When  I  grew  up,  I’d  show  them.  I’d  buy  an  Amazon rainforest, and all the trees that touched the sky would be mine. I’d buy a store with bottles covered in angels and no one would even get a piece of wing.
	Sulking,  I  sat  on  the  ground  and  leaned  my  anger  against  the  little orange tree. Glória walked away, smiling.
	‘That anger of yours won’t last, Zezé. You’ll see that I was right.’
	I  scratched  at  the  ground  with  a  stick  and  was  beginning  to  stop sniffling, when I heard a voice coming from I don’t know where, near my heart.
	‘I think your sister’s right.’
	‘Everyone’s always right. I’m the one who never is.’
	‘That’s not true. If you’d just take a proper look at me, you’d see.’ With a start, I scrambled up and stared at the little tree. It was strange because I always talked to everything, but I thought it was the little bird inside me that made everything talk back.
	‘But can you really talk?
	‘Can’t you hear me?’
	And  it  gave  a  little  chuckle.  I  almost  screamed  and  ran  away.  But curiosity kept me there.
	‘How do you talk?’
	‘Trees  talk  with  everything.  With  their  leaves,  their  branches,  theirroots. Want to see? Place your ear here on my trunk and you’ll hear my heartbeat.’
	I hesitated a moment, but seeing its size, my fear dissipated. I pressed my ear to its trunk and heard a faraway tick … tick …
	‘See?’
	‘Tell me something. Does everyone know you can talk?’
	‘No. Just you.’
	‘Really?’
	‘I  swear.  A  fairy  once  told  me  that  when  a  little  boy  just  like  you befriended me, I would talk and be very happy.’‘And will you wait?’
	‘What?’‘Until I move. It’ll take more than a week. You won’t forget how to talk, will you?’
	‘Never. That is, only for you. Do you want to see what a smooth ride Iam?’
	‘How can …’
	‘Sit on my branch.’I obeyed.
	‘Now, rock back and forth and close your eyes.’I did as I was told.
	‘What do you think? Have you ever had a better horse?’
	‘Never. It’s lovely. I’m going to give my horse Silver King to my little brother. You’ll really like him.’
	I climbed down, loving my little orange tree.
	‘Look, I’m going  to do something.  Whenever I can, even  before wemove, I’m going to come and chat with you. Now I have to go. They’re already out the front, about to head off.’
	‘But friends don’t say goodbye like that.’
	‘Psst! Here comes my sister.’Glória arrived just as I was hugging the tree.
	‘Goodbye, my friend. You’re the most beautiful thing in the world!’
	‘Didn’t I tell you?’
	‘You  did.  Now  if  you  offered me  the  mango  or  the  tamarind  tree  in exchange for mine, I wouldn’t want it.’
	She stroked my hair tenderly.
	‘Zezé, Zezé …’We left holding hands.
	‘Gló, your mango tree’s a bit dumb, don’t you think?’
	‘It’s too early to tell, but it does seem that way.’
	‘What about Totoca’s tamarind tree?’
	‘It’s a bit awkward, why?’
	‘I don’t know if I should tell you. But one day I’m going to tell you about a miracle, Gló.’




Chapter Three
THE LEAN FINGERS OF POVERTY


When  I  put  the  problem  to  Uncle  Edmundo,  he  gave  it  some  serious thought.
	‘So that’s what’s you’re worried about?’
	‘Yes, sir. I’m afraid that when we move house, Luciano won’t come with us.’
	‘Do you think this bat really likes you?’
	‘Of course.’
	‘From the bottom of his heart?’
	‘I’m sure of it.’
	‘Then you can be certain he’ll go. He might take a while to show up at the new place, but one day he’ll find the way.’
	‘I’ve already told him the street name and number.’
	‘Well, that makes it even easier. If he can’t go because he’s got other commitments, he’ll send a sibling, a cousin, a relative of some sort and you’ll never notice.’
	But  I  still  wasn’t  convinced.  What  good  was  the  street  name  and number  if  Luciano  didn’t  know  how  to  read?  Maybe  he’d  go  along asking the birds, the praying mantis, the butterflies.
	‘Don’t worry, Zezé. Bats are very good at finding their bearings.’
	‘At finding what, Uncle?’
	He explained what bearings meant and I was even more impressed by how much he knew.
	With my problem solved, I went out to tell everyone what was in store for us: the move. Most grown-ups said cheerfully, ‘You’re moving, Zezé? How lovely! How wonderful! What a relief!’
	The only one who didn’t bat an eyelid was Biriquinho.
	‘Good thing it’s only a few streets over. You’ll be nearby. What about that thing I told you about?’
	‘When is it?’
	‘Tomorrow,  at  eight,  at  the  door  to  the  casino.  Folks  are  saying  the owner of the factory ordered in a truckload of toys. You going?’
	‘Yep. I’m taking Luís. Do you think I’ll get something too?’
	‘Course. He’s a runt like you. Why? You think you’re too big?’
	He came closer and I felt that I was still really small. Smaller than I’dthought.
	‘Because if I’m going to get a present … But now I’ve got things todo. See you there.’
	I went home and hovered around Glória.
	‘What’s up, Zezé?’
	‘It’d be so nice if you could take us to the casino tomorrow. There’s a truck from the city stuffed full of toys.’
	‘Oh, Zezé. I have a pile of things to do. I have to iron, I have to help Jandira get things ready for the move, I have to keep an eye on the potson the stove …’
	‘A bunch of cadets from Realengo are going.’
	Besides  collecting  pictures  of  Rudolph  Valentino,  who  she  calledRudy, and pasting them into a notebook, she had a thing for cadets.
	‘You’ve got to be kidding me: cadets at eight o’clock in the morning? Pull the other leg! Run along and play, Zezé.’
	But I didn’t go.
	‘You know, Gló, it’s not for me. I promised Luís I’d take him. He’s so little. All children his age can think about is Christmas.’
	‘Zezé, I already told you I’m not going. And that’s a fib: you’re the one  who  wants  to  go.  You’ve  got  your  whole  life  to  get  Christmas presents.’
	‘But  what  if  I  die?  What  if  I  die  without  getting  a  present  this Christmas?’
	‘You’re not going to die so soon, my little old man. You’ll live twice as  long  as  Uncle  Edmundo  or  Seu  Benedito.  Now,  enough  of  this. Go play.’
	But I still didn’t go. I made sure she bumped into me everywhere she turned. She’d go to the chest of drawers to get something and she’d find me sitting on the rocking chair, begging her with my eyes. Begging with your eyes really got to her. She’d go to fetch water from the washtub andI’d be sitting in the doorway, looking at her. She’d go to the bedroom to get the clothes to be washed and I’d be sitting on the bed, chin in hands, looking …
	She couldn’t take it.
	‘Enough, Zezé. I’ve already told you that no means no. For heaven’s sake, don’t try my patience. Go play.’
	But again I didn’t go. That is, I thought I wasn’t going. But she picked me up, carried me out the door and dumped me in the backyard. Then she went back inside and closed the doors to the kitchen and the living room. I  didn’t  give  up.  I  sat  outside  every  window  she  was  going  to  pass, because now she was starting to dust and make the beds. She’d see  me peeping at her and would shut the window. She ended up shutting up the whole house so she wouldn’t see me.
	‘Meany!  Evil  witch!  I  hope  you  never  marry  a  cadet!  I  hope  you marry  a  private,  the  sort  who  can’t  even  afford  to  have  his  boots polished.’
	When  I  saw  that  I  was  wasting  my  time,  I  headed  for  the  street, fuming.
	I ran into Nardinho playing. He was squatting, staring at something, oblivious to everything else. I went over. He had made a little wagon outof a matchbox and tied it to the biggest beetle I’d ever seen.
	‘Wow!’
	‘Big, innit?’
	‘Wanna swap?’
	‘Why?’
	‘If you want some trading cards …’
	‘How many?’
	‘Two.’
	‘You’re kidding. A beetle this big and you’ll only give me two?’
	‘There’re  heaps  of  beetles  like  that  in  the  ditch  behind  Uncle Edmundo’s house.’
	‘I’ll do it for three.’
	‘Three, but you don’t get to pick.’
	‘Nothing doing. I get to pick at least two.’
	‘Fine.’
	I gave him one of Laura La Plante that I had several of. And he picked one of Hoot Gibson and another of Patsy Ruth Miller. I put the beetle in my pocket and went on my way.

* * *

‘Quick,  Luís.  Glória’s  gone  to  buy  bread  and  Jandira’s  reading  in  therocking chair.’
	We crept down the corridor to the toilet. I went to help him pee.
	‘Make it a big one, ’cause we’re not allowed to go in the street duringthe day.’
	Afterwards,  I  splashed  water  on  his  face  in  the  washtub.  I  did  the same to mine and we went back to the bedroom.
	I  dressed  him  without  making  any  noise.  I  put  his  shoes  on  him. Goddam socks! They just get in the way is all they do. I buttoned up his little blue suit and looked for a comb. But his hair wouldn’t stay down. Something  had  to be  done  about  it.  I  couldn’t  find  anything  anywhere. No brilliantine, no oil. I went into the kitchen and came back with a little lard on my fingertips. I rubbed it on my palm and took a whiff first.
	‘It doesn’t smell at all.’
	Then I slapped it on Luís’s hair and started combing. His head full of ringlets was beautiful. He looked like Saint John with a lamb on his back.
	‘Now, you stand over there, so you don’t get all wrinkled. I’m going to get dressed.’
	As I pulled on my trousers and white shirt, I looked at my brother. What  a  beautiful  child he  was!  There  was  no  one  more  beautiful  in Bangu.
	I pulled on my tennis shoes, which had to last until I went to school the next year. I kept looking at Luís.
	All  lovely  and  neat  like  that,  he  could  have  been  mistaken  for  aslightly older Baby Jesus. I was sure he was going to get lots of presents. When they set eyes on him …
	I shuddered. Glória had just come back and was putting the bread onthe table. I could hear the paper bag rustling.
	We went hand in hand and stood in front of her.
	‘Doesn’t he look lovely, Gló? I dressed him myself.’
	Instead of getting angry, she leaned on the door and looked up. When she lowered her head, her eyes were full of tears.
	‘You look lovely too. Oh! Zezé!
	’She kneeled down and held my head against her chest.
	‘Good God! Why does life have to be so hard for some?’
	She pulled herself together and started fixing our clothes.
	‘I told you I couldn’t take you. I really can’t, Zezé. I have too much to do. First let’s  have  breakfast, while I think of something. Even if Iwanted to, there isn’t enough time for me to get ready …’
	She poured us our coffee and sliced the bread. She continued staring at us with a look of despair.
	‘So much effort for a couple of lousy toys. But I guess there are too many poor people for them to give away really good things.’
	She paused and then went on. ‘It might be your only chance. I’m not going to stop you going. But, my God, you’re too small …’
	‘I’ll get him there safely. I’ll hold his hand the whole time, Gló. We don’t even need to cross the highway.’
	‘Even so, it’s dangerous.’
	‘No, it isn’t, and I’m good at finding my bearings.’
	She laughed through her sadness.
	‘Now, who taught you that?’
	‘Uncle  Edmundo.  He  said  Luciano’s  good  at  it,  and  if  Luciano’s smaller than me, then I’ll be better …’
	‘I’ll talk to Jandira.’
	‘Why bother? She’ll say yes. All Jandira does is read novels and think about her boyfriends. She doesn’t care.’
	‘Let’s do this: finish your breakfast and we’ll go to the gate. If we see someone we know who’s heading that way, I’ll ask them to go with you.’
	I didn’t even want to eat any bread, so as not to waste time. We went to the gate.
	Nothing  passed  except  time.  But  that  ended  up  passing  too.  Along came Seu Paixão, the postman. He waved to Glória, took off his cap and offered to accompany us.
	Glória kissed Luís and kissed me. She asked with a teary smile, ‘What was that thing about a private and his boots?’
	‘It’s  not  true.  I  didn’t  mean  it.  You’re  going  to  marry  an  aeroplane major with a bunch of stars on his shoulder.’
	‘Why didn’t you go with Totoca?’
	‘He  said  he  wasn’t  going.  And  that  he  wasn’t  in  the  mood  to  go lugging “baggage” around.’
	We  set  off.  Seu  Paixão  told  us  to  go  on  ahead  and  went along delivering letters to the houses. Then he would quicken his step and catch up with us. He  did it over  and  over.  When we reached the  highway, helaughed  and  said,  ‘Boys,  I’ve  got  to  speed  up.  You’re  making  me  fall behind in my work. Now, you go that way. It’s not at all dangerous.’
	He hurried off, with the bundle of letters and papers under his arm.
	I  thought  angrily,  ‘Coward!  Abandoning  two  little  children  on  the highway after promising Glória that he’d take us.’I  held  Luís’s  little  hand  even  tighter  and  we  kept  walking.  His tiredness  was  beginning  to  show.  His  steps  were  growing  shorter  and shorter.
	‘C’mon, Luís. It’s close now. There’re lots of toys.’
	He’d walk a little faster and then would go slower again.
	‘Zezé, I’m tired.’
	‘I’ll carry you a ways, OK?’
	He stretched out his arms and I carried him a bit. Boy, was he heavy, alead weight. When we reached Rua do Progresso, I was the one panting.
	‘Now you walk a bit more.’
	The church clock chimed eight o’clock.
	‘Oh dear! We were supposed to be there at seven-thirty. But it’s OK, there are lots of people and plenty of toys to go around. A truckload.’
	‘Zezé, my foot hurts.’
	I knelt down.
	‘I’m going to loosen your shoelaces a little and it’ll feel better. ’We  were going  slower and  slower.  It  felt  like we’d  never get  to  the market. We still had to pass the school and turn right on the street of the Bangu Casino. And the worst part was that time was flying on purpose. We arrived, dead on our feet. There was no one there. It didn’t even look like toys had been given out. But they had, because the street was littered with crumpled  tissue paper. Torn scraps of coloured  paper were strewn across the sand.
	My heart began to race.
	We  walked  up  to  the  casino  and  found  Seu  Coquinho  closing  the doors.
	‘Seu Coquinho, is it all over?’ I said in a fluster.
	‘Yep, Zezé. You came too late. It was mayhem.’
	He closed one side of the door and smiled kindly.
	‘There’s nothing left. Not even for my nieces and nephews.’
	He closed the other side of the door and stepped into the street.
	‘Next year, you need to come earlier, you sleepyheads!’
	‘It’s OK.’
	It wasn’t. I was so sad and disappointed that I’d rather have died than have that happen.
	‘Let’s sit down over there. We need to rest a little.’
	‘I’m thirsty, Zezé.’
	‘When  we  pass  the  pastry  shop,  we  can  ask  Seu  Rozemberg  for  a glass of water. That’s it for us today.’
	It was only then that he understood the tragedy. He didn’t even speak,just looked at me, his bottom lip jutting out and eyes brimming.
	‘Don’t worry, Luís. You know my little horse, Silver King? I’m going to ask Totoca to change his pole and give it to you for Christmas.’
	He sniffled.
	‘No,  don’t  do  that.  You’re  a  king.  Father  said  he  named  you  Luís because it was a king’s name. And a king can’t cry in the street, in front of other people.’
	I leaned his head against my chest and stroked his curly hair.
	‘When  I  grow  up,  I’m  going  to  buy  a  beautiful  car  like  Manuel Valadares’s.  Remember,  the Portuguese  man who  passed  us once  at  thetrain  station  when  we  went  to  wave  at  the  Mangaratiba Express?  Well, I’m going to buy a beautiful big car like that, full of presents just for you… But don’t cry, ’cause kings don’t cry.’
	My chest exploded with sorrow.
	‘I swear I’m going to buy one. Even if I have to kill and steal …’
	It wasn’t the  little bird  inside  me saying  that.  It  must have  been  my heart. It was the only way. Why didn’t Jesus like me? He even liked the oxand the donkey in the
manger. But not me. He was punishing me because I was the devil’s godson. He was punishing me by not giving my brother a present. But that wasn’t fair on Luís, because he was an angel. There couldn’t have been an angel in heaven that was better than him …
	Cowardly tears began to roll down my face.
	‘Zezé, you’re crying …’
	‘It’ll  pass  soon.  Besides,  I’m  not  a  king  like  you.  I’m  good  for nothing. A naughty boy, really naughty … That’s all.’

* * *

‘Totoca, have you been to the new house?’
	‘No. Have you?’
	‘I pop over there whenever I can.’
	‘But why?’
	‘I want to see how Pinkie is.’
	‘Who the heck is Pinkie?’
	‘He’s my orange tree.’
	‘You  found  a  name  that  really  suits  him.  You’re  good  at  finding things.’
	He  laughed  and  continued  whittling  what  was  going  to  be  Silver King’s new body.
	‘And how is he?’
	‘He hasn’t grown at all.’
	‘Nor  will  he  if  you  keep  watching  him.  What  do  you  think?  Is  this how you wanted the pole?’
	‘Yes. Totoca, how is it that you know how to do everything? You can make cages, chicken coops, nurseries, fences, gates …’
	‘That’s because not everyone was born to be a poet in a bowtie. But ifyou really wanted to, you could learn.’
	‘I  don’t  think  so.  One  needs  to  have  the  “inclination”  to  do  thosethings.’
	He  paused  for  a  moment  and  looked  at  me,  half  laughing,  half disapproving of the new word Uncle Edmundo had probably taught me.
	Gran  had  come  over  and  was  in  the  kitchen  making  French  toast soaked in wine for Christmas Eve supper. It was all there was.
	I said to Totoca, ‘And some people don’t even have this much. Uncle Edmundo gave us the money for the wine and to buy things for the fruit salad for lunch tomorrow.’
	Totoca  was  making  the  new  pole  for  free  because  he’d  heard  about what had happened at Bangu Casino. At least Luís would get something.
Something  old  and  second-hand,  but something  very  beautiful, which  Iliked a lot.
	‘Totoca?’
	‘What?’
	‘Do  you  think  we’re  going  to  get  nothing  at  all  from  Father Christmas?’
	‘I don’t think so.’
	‘Tell me the truth. Do you think I’m as naughty, as bad as everyone says?’
	‘Not bad bad. It’s just that you’ve got the devil in your blood.’
	‘When  Christmas  comes  I  really  wish  I  didn’t!  I  hope  that  before  Idie,  at  least  once  in  my  life,  the  Baby  Jesus  will  be  born  in  my  heart instead of the devil child.’
	‘Maybe  next  year  …  Why  don’t  you  learn  from  me  and  do  what  Ido?’
	‘What do you do?’
	‘I  don’t  expect  anything.  That  way  I  don’t  get  disappointed.  Jesusisn’t  as  good  as  everyone  says. ’Cause the priest says that even if the catechism says …’
	He paused, unsure if he should go on.
	‘Even if it says what?’
	‘Well, let’s just say that you were really naughty and didn’t deserve athing. But what about Luís?’
	‘He’s an angel.’
	‘And Glória?’
	‘She is too.’
	‘And me?’
	‘Well, sometimes you … you … use my things, but you’re good.’
	‘And Lalá?’
	‘She  hits  hard,  but  she’s  good.  One  day  she’s  going  to  sew  me  a bowtie.’
	‘And Jandira?’
	‘Jandira is Jandira, but she isn’t bad.’
	‘And Mother?’
	‘Mother’s very good; she feels sorry for me when she smacks me, and she does it gently.’
	‘And Father?’
	‘Hmm! I’m not sure about him. He never gets lucky. I think he musthave been like me, the bad one of the family.’
	‘Well, then. Everyone in the family is good. So why isn’t Jesus good to us? Now go to Dr Faulhaber’s house and see the size of the table, piled high. The Villas-Boas’s house, too. And Dr Adaucto Luz’s house, don’t even get me started …’
	For the first time I saw that Totoca was almost crying.
	‘That’s why I think Jesus Christ only wanted to be born poor to show off. Afterwards he saw that only the rich were any good … But let’s not talk about this any more. What I said might be a really big sin.’
	He  was  so  distraught  that  he  didn’t  even  look  up  from  the  horse’s body that he was now stroking.

* * *

Supper that  Christmas Eve  was so  sad that  I didn’t even want  to think. Everyone  ate  in  silence  and  Father  only  had  a little  taste  of  the  French toast.  He  hadn’t  shaved  or  anything.  No  one  went  to  mass.  The  worst thing was that no one said anything to anyone. It was more like the Baby Jesus’s funeral than his birth.
	Father fetched his hat and went out. He left without saying goodbye or  wishing  anyone  Merry  Christmas,  in  his  sandals.  Gran  pulled  out  a handkerchief and dabbed her eyes and asked Uncle Edmundo to take her home. Uncle Edmundo put five tostões in my hand and five in Totoca’s. Maybe  he  wanted  to  give  us  more  but  didn’t  have  enough.  Maybe, instead  of  giving  it  to  us,  he  wished  he  could  be  giving  it  to  his  own children in the city. That’s why I hugged him. I think it was the only hugof  the  evening.  No  one  embraced  or  had  anything  nice  to  say.  Mother went to her room. I’m sure it was to cry in secret. And everyone felt like doing  the  same.  Lalá  went  to  see  off  Uncle  Edmundo  and  Gran  at  the gate  and  when  they  walked  away  ever  so  slowly,  she  said,  ‘They  look like they’re too old for life and tired of everything.’
	The saddest thing was that the church bell filled the night with happy voices.  And  some  rockets  shot  up  to  the  heavens  for  God  to  see  how happy people were.
	When we went back inside, Glória and Jandira were washing the dirty dishes and Glória’s eyes were red as if she’d cried her heart out.
	She tried to hide it and said to me and Totoca, ‘It’s time for children togo to bed.’
	She  looked  at  us  as  she  said  it.  She  knew  that  there  were  no  more children  there.  We  were  all  big  –  big  and  sad,  supping  on  the  same tattered sadness.
	Maybe it was all the fault of the dull lamplight that had replaced the light that the power company had cut off. Maybe.
	The only happy one was the little king, who was fast asleep with his thumb  in  his  mouth.  I  stood  the  little  horse  next  to  his  bed.  I  couldn’t resist gently stroking his hair. My voice was a vast river of tenderness.
	‘Pipsqueak.’
	When the whole house was dark, I said quietly, ‘The French toast was good, wasn’t it, Totoca?’
	‘I don’t know. I didn’t have any.’
	‘Why not?’
	‘I  had  something  caught  in  my  throat,  nothing  would  go  down  …Let’s sleep. Sleep makes you forget everything.’
	I  started  to  get up  and  Totoca  could hear  me moving  around  on thebed.
	‘Where’re you going, Zezé?’
	‘I’m going to put my shoes outside the door.’
	‘Don’t. Best not to.’
	‘I’m  going  to.  You  never  know,  maybe  a  miracle  will  happen.  You know, Totoca,  I’d  love  a present.  Just  one.  But something  new,  just  for me …’
	He rolled over and shoved his head under the pillow.

* * *

I called Totoca the minute I woke up.
	‘Let’s go see! I say there is something.’
	‘I wouldn’t bother.’
	‘Well, I’m going to.’
	I opened the bedroom door and, to my disappointment, my shoes were empty. Totoca came over, rubbing his eyes.
	‘Didn’t I tell you?’
	A mixture of everything welled up in my soul. It was loathing, anger and  sadness.  Unable  to  contain  myself,  I  blurted  out,  ‘Having  a  poor father is awful!’
	My eyes travelled from my shoes to a pair of sandals that were parked in  front  of  me.  Father  was  standing there  looking  at  us.  His  eyes  were enormous with sadness. It looked like his eyes had grown so big – so big that they’d occupy the entire Bangu Cinema screen. There was so much hurt in his eyes that he couldn’t have cried if he’d wanted to. He stood there  looking  at  us  for  a  minute  that  was  endless,  then  walked  past  in silence.  We  stood  there,  frozen,  unable  to  say  a  thing.  He  took  his  hat from the chest of drawers and left the house again. Only then did Totoca touch my arm.
	‘You’re mean, Zezé. Mean as a snake. That’s why …’
	His voice faltered and he stopped.
	‘I didn’t see him there.’
	‘Mean.  Heartless.  You  know  Father’s  been  unemployed  for  a  long time. That’s why I couldn’t swallow yesterday, looking at his face. One day you’ll  be a father  and you’ll  know how  much it  hurts at  times like this.’
	Any more and I’d cry.
	‘But I didn’t see him, Totoca, I didn’t see …’
	‘Get away from me. You really are good for nothing. Go!’
	I felt like racing down the street and clinging to Father’s legs, crying. Telling him I’d  been mean  – really,  really mean.  But I  just stood  there, not knowing what to do. I sat on the bed. And from there I stared at my shoes, in the same corner, as empty as could be. As empty as my heart, careening out of control.
	Good God, why did I do that? Today of all days. Why did I have to be even  meaner  when  everything  was  already  so  sad?  How  will  I  look  at him at lunchtime? I won’t even be able to swallow the fruit salad.
	And in my mind his big eyes, like a cinema screen, were glued to me,staring. I closed my eyes and still saw his big, big eyes …
	I  tapped  my shoe shine  box  with  my  heel  and  had  an idea.  Maybe  I could make Father forgive me for being so mean.
	I  opened  Totoca’s  box  and  borrowed  a  tin  of  black  shoe  polish because mine was running out. I didn’t say a word to anyone. I walked sadly down the street, not feeling the weight of the box. It was as if I was walking over his eyes. Hurting inside his eyes.
	It  was  very  early  and  adults  were  probably  still  asleep  because  of mass and supper the night before. The street was full of children showing off and comparing their toys. It made me feel even worse. They were all good children. None of them would ever do what I’d done.
	I stopped near the Misery and Hunger hoping to find a customer. The bar  was  open  even  on  Christmas  Day.  It  was  no  accident  it  had  the nickname it did. People came in their pyjamas, in slippers, in sandals –but real shoes, never.
	I hadn’t eaten breakfast and wasn’t at all hungry. My pain was muchg reater  than  any  hunger.  I  walked  to  Rua  do  Progresso.  I  circled  the market. I sat on the pavement outside Seu Rozemberg’s pastry shop and… nothing. 
	The hours ran into one another and I didn’t make a single tostão. But I had to. I had to.
	It  grew  hotter  and  the  strap  was  hurting  my  shoulder,  so  I  had  to change positions from time to time. I felt thirsty and went to get a drink at the fountain in the market.
	I sat on the front step of the school, which I’d probably have to go to soon. I  put down  the box,  discouraged. Leaning  my head  on my knees like a doll, I  just sat there, feeling  listless. Then I hid  my face between my  knees  and  covered  it  with  my  arms.  Better  to  die  than  go  home without getting what I wanted.
	A shoe tapped on my box and I heard a familiar, friendly voice.
	‘Hey, shoeshine, you won’t make any money sleeping on the job.’ I looked up, unable to believe it. It was Seu Coquinho, the doorman of the  casino.  He  placed one  shoe on  the  box and  I wiped  it with  my  rag first, then wet the shoe and dried it off. Then I started carefully rubbing in the shoe polish.
	‘Could you please lift up your trouser leg, sir?’
	He did as I asked.
	‘Working today, Zezé?’
	‘I’ve never needed to more.’
	‘And how was Christmas?’
	‘It was OK.’
	I  tapped  the  box with  the  brush and  he changed  feet. I  repeated  the steps and then began to polish. When I finished, I tapped the box and he took his shoe off it.
	‘How much, Zezé?’
	‘Two tostões.’
	‘Why only two? Everyone else charges four.’
	‘I’ll  only  be  able  to  charge  that  much  when  I’m  a  really  good shoeshine. But not now.’
	He handed me five tostões.
	‘Keep the change for Christmas. See you later.’
	‘Merry Christmas, Seu Coquinho.’
	Maybe  he’d  come  to  get  his  shoes  polished  because  of  what  had happened three days earlier.
	The  money  in  my  pocket  lifted  my  spirits  a  little,  but  it  didn’t  last long.  It  was  already  after  two  in  the  afternoon,  people  were  out  and about, and still nothing. Not a single customer, not even to dust off their shoes and relieve themselves of a tostão.
	I stood near a lamppost on the highway and shouted from time to timein  my  high-pitched  voice:  ‘Shoeshine,  mister?  Shoeshine,  sir?  Get  a shoeshine and help the poor at Christmas!’ A  rich  man’s  car  stopped  nearby.  I  took  the  opportunity  to  shout again, not at all hopeful.
	‘A helping hand, sir? To help the poor at Christmas.’
	The  well-dressed  woman  and  children  in  the  back  seat  sat  there staring and staring at me. The woman took pity on me.
	‘Poor little thing, so small and so poor. Give him something, Artur.’
	But the man was eyeing me suspiciously.
	‘That one there’s a little delinquent, and a wily one at that. He’s taking advantage of his size and the day.’
	‘Well, I’m going to give him something anyway. Come here, son.’
	She opened her handbag and stuck her hand out the window.
	‘No, ma’am, thank you. I’m not lying. You only work on Christmas if you really have to.’
	I  picked  up  my  box,  slung  it  over  my  shoulder  and  started  walking slowly. I had no energy left to be angry.
	But the car door opened and a little boy came running over to me.
	‘Here, take this. Mother said to say she doesn’t think you’re lying.’
	He shoved five tostões in my pocket and didn’t even wait for me to thank him … I just heard the noise of the car engine moving away.
	Four hours had passed and Father’s eyes were still tormenting me.
	I  started  to  make  my  way  home.  Ten  tostões  wasn’t  enough,  but maybe the Misery and Hunger would give it to me for less or let me pay the difference another day.
	Something  caught  my  eye  on  the  corner  of  a  fence.  It  was  a  torn, black, woman’s stocking. I bent over and picked it up. I pulled it over my hand  and  the  fabric  became  very  thin.  I  put  it  in  my  box,  thinking, ‘This’ll make a good snake.’ But I argued with myself. ‘Another day. Nottoday, no way …’
	I came to the Villas-Boas family’s house. It had a large cemented-overfront  yard.  Serginho  was  riding  around  the  flower  beds  on  a  beautiful bicycle. I pressed my face against the fence to watch.
	The  bicycle  was  red  with  streaks  of  yellow  and  blue.  The  metal gleamed.  Serginho  saw  me  and  began  to  show  off.  He  went  fast,  sped around  corners  and  braked so  hard  the wheels  squealed. Then  he  came over.
	‘Like it?’
	‘It’s the most beautiful bike in the world.’
	‘Come to the gate – you’ll be able to see better.’
	Serginho was Totoca’s age and in his class.
	I was ashamed of my bare feet because he was wearing shiny shoes, white  socks  and  red  braces.  His  shoes  were  so  shiny  they  reflected everything.  Even  Father’s  eyes began  to stare  out  of the  shine at  me.  I gulped.
	‘S’up, Zezé? You’re acting weird.’
	‘Nothing. It’s even more beautiful up close. You get it for Christmas?’
	‘Yep.’
	He climbed off the bike to talk and opened the gate.
	‘I got lots of stuff. A gramophone, three suits, a heap of story-books, a huge  box  of  coloured  pencils.  A  box  full  of  games,  a  plane  with  a propeller that moves. Two boats with white sails …’
	I lowered my head and remembered Baby Jesus, who only liked rich people, just as Totoca had said.
	‘What’s wrong, Zezé?’
	‘Nothing.’
	‘What about you? … Did you get lots of stuff?’
	I shook my head, unable to reply.
	‘Nothing? Nothing at all?’
	‘This year we didn’t have Christmas at my place. Father’s still out of work.’
	‘It’s not possible. Didn’t you have nuts, wine?’
	‘Just French toast, which Gran made, and coffee.’
	Serginho looked thoughtful.
	‘Zezé, will you accept an invitation?’
	I had a fair idea what it was. But even though my stomach was empty I didn’t feel like it.
	‘Let’s go inside. Mother will fix you a plate. There’s so much food, somany sweets …’
	I  didn’t  want  to  take  the  risk.  I’d  had  a hard  time  of  it  the  last  fewdays. I’d heard someone say more than once, ‘I’ve told you before not tobring street kids into the house.’
	‘No, thank you very much.’
	‘OK. What if I ask Mother to make a packet of nuts and things for youto take to your little brother – will you take it?’
	‘I can’t. I have to finish work.’
	Only then did Serginho notice the shoeshine box that I was sitting on.
	‘But no one gets their shoes shined on Christmas …’
	‘I’ve been at it all day and I only made ten tostões, and half of it was people taking pity on me. I still need to make another two.’
	‘What for, Zezé?’
	‘I can’t say. But I really need it.’He smiled and had a generous idea.‘Want to shine mine? I’ll give you ten tostões.’
	‘I can’t do that either. I don’t charge friends.’
	‘Well, what if I give you, that is, lend you, the two tostões?’
	‘Can I take a while to pay you back?’
	‘Whatever you like. You can even pay me in marbles.’
	‘Then, yes.’
	He reached into his pocket and handed me the money.
	‘Don’t  worry  about  it,  ’cause  people  gave  me  a  lot  of  money.  My piggy bank’s full.’
	I ran my hand over the wheel of the bike.
	‘It’s really beautiful.’
	‘When you’re  bigger  and learn  how  to ride,  I’ll  let you  take it  for  a spin, OK?’
	‘OK.’

* * *

I charged off to the Misery and Hunger, my shoeshine box jiggling.
	I raced in like a hurricane, afraid it might be closing time.
	‘Have you still got those expensive cigarettes?’
	Seu  Misery  and  Hunger  got  two  packets  down  when  he  saw  the money in my hand.
	‘This isn’t for you, is it, Zezé?’
	A voice behind him said, ‘Are you mad? A child that size!’
	Without turning, he replied, ‘You don’t know this customer. This kid’s capable of anything.’
	‘It’s for Father.’
	I felt enormously happy as I turned the packets over in my hands. ‘This one or this one?’
	‘It’s up to you.’
	‘I spent the day working to buy this Christmas present for Father.’‘
	Is that so, Zezé? And what did he give you?’
	‘Nothing, the poor fellow. He’s still unemployed, you know.’
	He was moved. No one at the bar spoke.
	‘Which one would you like if it was you?’
	‘Both are nice. And any father would like a present like this.’
	‘Then wrap this one up for me, please, sir.’
	He wrapped it up, but he looked a bit strange when he handed me the package, as if he wanted to say something but couldn’t. I handed him the money and smiled.
	‘Thanks, Zezé.’
	‘Merry Christmas to you, sir!’
	I ran home.
	Night  had  fallen.  Only  the  lantern  in  the  kitchen  was  on.  Everyone had  gone out,  but  Father  was  sitting  at  the  table  staring  vacantly  at the wall, chin in hand, elbow on the table.
	‘Father.’
	‘What,  son?’  
	There  wasn’t  a  trace  of  resentment  in  his  voice. ‘Where’ve you been all day?’
	I showed him my shoeshine box. Then I set it on the floor and pulled the package out of my pocket.
	‘Look, Father, I bought you something nice.’
	He smiled, understanding how much it had cost.
	‘Do you like it? It was the nicest one they had.’
	He opened the packet and took a whiff of the cigarettes, smiling, but unable to say anything.
	‘Smoke one, Father.’
	I went to the stove to get a match. I struck it and held it close to the cigarette in his mouth.
	I stepped back to watch him take his first drag. And something began to well up in me. I threw the burnt match on the floor, feeling that I was bursting.  Erupting  on  the  inside. That  enormous  pain  that  had  been threatening to erupt all day.
	I looked at Father. His unshaven face, his eyes.
	‘Father … Father …’ was all I could say before tears and sobs got the better of my voice.
	He spread his arms wide and hugged me tenderly.
	‘Don’t cry, son. You’re going to have a lot to cry about in life, if you go on being so emotional …’
	‘I didn’t mean to, Father … I didn’t mean to say … that.’
	‘I know. I know. I wasn’t upset, because deep down you were right.’
	He  rocked  me  in  his  arms  a  little  more.  Then  he  lifted  my  face  and dried it with a tea towel that was lying nearby.
	‘That’s better.’
	I raised my hands and stroked his face. I passed them lightly over his eyes, trying to put  them back where  they belonged, away  from that big cinema  screen.  I  was  afraid  that  if  I  didn’t,  those  eyes  were  going  to follow me for the rest of my life.
	‘I’m going to finish off my cigarette.’
	Still  choked  up,  I  spluttered,  ‘You  know,  Father,  when  you  want  to beat me, I’ll never complain again. You just go ahead and do it …’
	‘Hey, hey, Zezé.’
	He  put  me  and  the  rest  of  my  sobs  down  and  got  a  plate  from  the cupboard.
	‘Glória saved a bit of fruit salad for you.’
	I couldn’t swallow. He sat down and fed it to me in small spoonfuls.
	‘It’s OK now, isn’t it, son?’
	I nodded, but the first spoonfuls tasted salty. It was my last few tears, which were taking a long time to go away.



Chapter Four
THE LITTLE BIRD, SCHOOL AND THE FLOWER

New house. New life and simple hopes, hopes pure and simple.
	On  moving  day,  off  I  went  between  Seu  Aristides  and  his  helper, perched on the top of the cart, as happy as the day was hot.
	When  it  left  the  unpaved  street  and  turned  onto  the  Rio–São  Paulo highway  it  was  marvellous.  The  cart  slid  smoothly  along  now.  It  was lovely.
	A beautiful car passed us.
	‘There goes Manuel Valadares’s car.’
	When we were crossing the intersection at Rua dos Açudes, a distant whistle filled the morning.
	‘Hey, Seu Aristides. There goes the Mangaratiba.’
	‘You know everything, don’t you?’
	‘I know the sound it makes.’
	The only sound was hooves going clip-clop on the highway. 
	I noticed that  the  cart  wasn’t  very  new.  On  the  contrary.  But  it  was  sturdy  and affordable.  Two  more  trips  and  we’d  have  moved  all  our  junk.  The donkey didn’t look too strong. But I wanted to be nice.
	‘This is a fine cart, Seu Aristides.’
	‘It does the job.’
	‘And that’s a fine donkey. What’s his name?’
	‘Gypsy.’
	He wasn’t in the mood for chit-chat.
	‘Today’s a  big day for me.  This is my first  time on a cart.  And I’ve seen Manuel Valadares’s car and heard the Mangaratiba.’
	Silence. Nothing.
	‘Seu Aristides, is the Mangaratiba the most important train in Brazil?’
	‘No. It’s the most important one on this line.’
	It was no use. How hard it was to understand grown-ups sometimes!
	When we got to the house, I handed him the key and tried to be polite: ‘Would you like me to help with anything, sir?’
	‘You can help by staying out of our way. Go play and we’ll call you when it’s time to head back.’
	So I did.
	‘Pinkie, now we’re always going to live near each other. I’m going to dress you up so beautifully that no other tree will hold a candle to you. You know, Pinkie, just now I rode on a cart so big and smooth that it felt like one of those coaches that you see in the cinema. Look, everything I find out, I’ll come tell you, OK?
	I went over to the long grass growing in the ditch and looked  at the dirty water running through it.
	‘What did we decide the river was going to be called the other day?’
	‘The Amazon.’
	‘That’s  right.  The  Amazon.  Downstream  it  must  be  full  of  savage Indians’ canoes, right, Pinkie?’
	‘Tell me about it! It must be.’
	We’d  barely started  chatting  and  there  was Seu  Aristides  closing  up the house and calling me.
	‘You staying or coming with us?’
	‘I’ll stay here. Mother and my sisters must be on their way by now.’
	And I went around examining every little detail of the place.

* * *

In  the  beginning,  out  of  shyness,  or  because  I  wanted  to  make  a  good impression on  the neighbours,  I was  well  behaved. But  one afternoon  Istuffed the black stocking, rolled it in twine and cut out the tip of the toe. Then I tied a long piece of kite string to the place where the toe had been. From a distance, if I pulled slowly on it, it looked like a snake, and in the dark it would work a charm.
	At night everyone went about their own business. It was as if the new house  had  changed  everyone’s  spirits.  There  was  a  cheerfulness  in  the family that hadn’t been present for a long time.
	I waited quietly by the gate. The street was dimly lit by the lampposts and the hedges cast shadows into corners. There must have been people working  overtime  at  the  factory  and  overtime  never  went  past  eight o’clock.  It  rarely  went  past  nine.  I  thought  about  the  factory  for  a moment. I didn’t like it. Its sad morning whistle was even uglier at five o’clock. The factory was a dragon that gobbled up people every morning and spewed them out, very tired, at night. I also didn’t like it because of what Mr Scottfield had done to Father.
	Along came a woman. She was holding a handbag and had a parasol under  her  arm.  You  could  hear  the  clickety-clack  of  her  heels  on  the pavement.
	I  ran  to  hide  behind  the  gate  and  tested  the  string  attached  to  thesnake. It obeyed. It was perfect. Then I crouched down in the shadow of the hedge with the string in my fingers. Her heels drew closer and closer, then even closer and zip! I tugged on the string. It slid slowly across the middle of the street.
	I  wasn’t  expecting  what  happened  next.  The  woman  screamed  so loudly that she roused  the street. She  threw her handbag  and parasol in the air and clasped her belly, screaming all the while.
	‘Help! Help! A snake! Someone help me!’
	Doors  were  flung  open  and  I  dropped  everything,  bolted  down  theside of the house and entered through the kitchen. I took the lid off the laundry basket and climbed inside, pulling the lid over the top. My heartwas pounding in fright and I could still hear the woman screaming.
	‘Oh,  my  God,  I’m  six  months  pregnant  and  I’m  going  to  lose  my baby.’
	Not only did a shiver run down my spine, but I began to tremble.
	The neighbours took her inside but the sobs and laments continued.
	‘Good Lord, good Lord. A snake of all things – I’m terrified of them.’
	‘Have a little orange blossom water. There, there, stay calm. The men have gone after it with sticks, an axe and a lantern to light the way.’
	What a  big fuss  over a  little stocking  snake! But  the  worst  part  was that my family had also gone to see what was going on. Jandira, Motherand Lalá.
	‘That’s not a snake. It’s an old stocking.’
	In my fright I had forgotten to remove the ‘snake’. I was done for.
	Attached to the snake was the string and the string led into our yard.
	Three familiar voices chimed at once, ‘It was him!’
	It wasn’t the snake they were after now. They looked under the bed. Nothing. They passed by me and I didn’t even breathe. They went out the back to look in the outhouse.
	Then Jandira had an idea.
	‘I think I know where he is!’
	She lifted the  lid off the  laundry basket  and  I  was  hauled  out  to  the dining room by the ears.
	Mother beat me hard this time. Her flip-flop whistled through the air and  I  really  had  to  holler  so  it  wouldn’t  hurt  so  much  and  she’d  stop hitting me.
	‘You little pest! You have no idea how hard it is to get around when you’re six months pregnant.’
	‘He took his time to get started!’ said Lalá wryly.‘
	Now, straight to bed, you little wretch.’
	I  left,  scratching  my  backside,  and  lay  down  on  my  belly.  Luckily Father  had  gone  out  to  play  cards.  I  lay  there  in the  dark  sniffling and thinking that going to bed was the best way to get over a paddling.

* * *

I got up early the next day. I had two very important things to do: first, go have a look around, very casually. If the snake was still there, I’d get itand hide it in my shirt. I could still use it somewhere else. But it wasn’t. It’d be hard to find another stocking as snake-like as that one.
	I  turned  and  started  off  to  Gran’s  house.  I  needed  to  talk  to  Uncle Edmundo.
	I  knew  it  was  still  early  for  a  retired  person.  I wanted  to  catch  him before he went out to buy a lottery ticket – or ‘place a bet’, as he called it–  and  pick  up  the  newspapers.  I  was  right.  He  was  in  the  living  room playing a new kind of patience.
	‘Morning, Uncle!’
	He  didn’t  answer.  He  was  pretending  to  be  deaf.  Back  at  home everyone  said  that  he  did  that  when  he  wasn’t  interested  in  the conversation.
	But  never  with  me.  In  fact  (how  I  liked  saying  ‘in  fact’!),  he  was never very deaf around me. I tugged on his shirt sleeve and, as always, thought his black-and-white-chequered braces looked very fine.
	‘Ah! It’s you …’
	He was pretending he hadn’t seen me.
	‘What’s the name of this patience, Uncle?’
	‘It’s called The Clock.’
	‘It’s pretty.’
	I already knew all the cards in the deck. I just wasn’t too keen on the jacks. I don’t know why but they looked like the kings’ servants.
	‘You know, Uncle, I’ve come to tell you something.’
	‘I’m just about finished. When I’m done, we can talk.’
	But soon he shuffled all the cards up.
	‘Did you win?’
	‘No.’
	He made a little pile of cards and set it aside.
	‘OK, Zezé, if this something has to do with money,’ he said, rubbing his fingers together, ‘I’m ready.’
	‘Haven’t you got one little tostão for me to buy a marble with?’
	He smiled.
	‘I might have one little tostão. Who knows?’
	He was about to put his hand in his pocket, but I stopped him.
	‘Just kidding, Uncle, that’s not it.’
	‘Well, then what is it?’
	I could tell my ‘precociousness’ amused him, especially after I taught myself to read.
	‘I’d like to know something very important. Do you know how to sing without singing?’
	‘I’m not sure I follow.’
	‘Like this,’ and I sang a verse of ‘The Little House’. ‘I can do it all inside without singing on the outside.’
	‘That’s humming,’ he laughed, unsure where I was going with it.
	‘Look, Uncle, when I was little, I thought I had a little bird inside me that sang. It was the bird that sang.’
	‘Well, then. It’s wonderful that you have a little bird like that.’
	‘You  don’t  understand.  It’s  just  that  now  I’m  not  so  sure  about  the bird. What about when I speak and see on the inside?’
	He understood and laughed at my confusion.
	‘I’ll tell you what it is, Zezé. It means you’re growing. And when you grow,  this  thing  that  you  say  speaks  and  sees  is  called  thinking.  And thinking is what makes you reach the age I said you’d be reaching soon.’
	‘The age of reason?’
	‘It’s  good  that  you  remember.  Then  something  wonderful  happens. Our thinking grows and grows and takes over our heads and our hearts. It lives in our eyes and in every part of our lives.’
	‘Right. And what about the little bird?’
	‘The  little  bird  was  made  by  God  to  help  children  discover  things.Then when the child no longer needs it, he gives it back to God. And God puts it in another intelligent boy like you. Isn’t that beautiful?’
	I laughed happily because I was thinking.
	‘It is. I’ll be going now.’
	‘Still want that tostão?’
	‘Not today. I’m going to be very busy.’
	I set off down the street thinking about everything. But I remembered something that made me really sad. Totoca used to have a beautiful finch. It was tame and perched on his finger when he changed its birdseed. He could even leave the door open and it wouldn’t fly away. One day Totoca forgot  him  out  in  the  sun.  And  the  hot  sun  killed  him.  I  remembered Totoca holding him in his hand, crying; crying and holding the dead bird to his cheek. Then he said, ‘I’ll never keep a bird in a cage again.’
	I was with him and said, ‘Me neither, Totoca.’
	When I got home I went straight to Pinkie.
	‘Sweety, I’ve come to do something.’
	‘What?’
	‘Can we wait a bit?’
	‘OK.’
	I sat down and leaned my head against his trunk.
	‘What are we waiting for, Zezé?’
	‘For a really pretty cloud to float past in the sky.’
	‘What for?’
	‘I’m going to let my little bird go. Yes, I’m going to. I don’t need it any more.’
	We sat there staring at the sky.
	‘Is it that one, Pinkie?’
	The cloud came drifting along slowly, really big, like a white leaf with torn edges.
	‘That’s the one, Pinkie.’
	I stood and unbuttoned my shirt. I felt it leaving my skinny chest.
	‘Fly  away,  little  bird.  Really  high.  Go  way  up  high  and  perch  onGod’s finger. God is going to take you to another little boy and you are going to  sing  beautifully for  him  just  as  you  always  have for  me.  Bye-bye, my sweet little bird!’
	I felt an emptiness inside that was endless.
	‘Look, Zezé. It perched on the cloud’s finger.’
	‘I see it.’
	I  leaned  my  head against  Pinkie’s  heart  and  watched the  cloud  drift away.
	‘I never mistreated him …’
	Then I turned my face and pressed it against Pinkie’s branch.
	‘Sweetie.’
	‘What?’
	‘Is it wrong for me to cry?’
	‘It’s never wrong to cry, silly. Why?’
	‘I don’t know,  I’m still not used to it. It feels like my cage inside is too empty now.’

* * *

Glória woke me up early.
	‘Show me your fingernails.’
	I showed her my hands and she approved them.
	‘Now your ears. Ew, Zezé!’
	She took me to the washtub, wet a cloth with soap on it and rubbed off the filth.
	‘I’ve never seen someone who claims to be an Apinajé warrior who’s always dirty! Go get your shoes on while I find some decent clothes foryou to wear.’
	She  went  to  my  drawer  and  rummaged  around.  And  she  rummaged around some more. And the more she rummaged, the less she found. All my trousers had holes in them, or were torn, patched or darned.
	‘You don’t need to say a thing. If anyone ever saw this drawer, they’dknow what a terror you are. Put this one on, it’s not as bad as the rest.
	And  off  we  went  for  the  ‘wonderful’  discovery  that  I  was  about  to make.
	School. As  we  approached,  we  saw  a whole  bunch  of  people  taking children by the hand to enrol them.
	‘Now, don’t look sad or forget anything, Zezé.’
	We took a seat in a room full of children who were all peering at one another. Then our turn came and we went into the headmistress’s office.
	‘Is he your little brother?’
	‘Yes, ma’am. Mother couldn’t come because she works in the city.’
	She  looked  at  me  for  a  long  time  and  her  eyes  were  big  and  black because her glasses were  very thick. Funny  thing was, she  had a man’s moustache. She must have been the headmistress because of that.
	‘Isn’t he too young?’
	‘He’s small for his age. But he already knows how to read.’
	‘How old are you, boy?’
	‘On the twenty-sixth of February I turn six, ma’am.’
	‘Very well. Let’s fill in your application. First your parents’ names.’
	Glória  told  her  Father’s  name.  But  when she  got to  Mother’s name, she just said, ‘Estefânia de Vasconcelos.’
	I  couldn’t  help  myself  and  corrected  her,  ‘Estefânia  Apinajé  deVasconcelos.’
	‘Excuse me?’
	Glória blushed a little.
	‘It’s Apinajé. Mother’s parents were Indians.’
	I puffed up with pride because I must have been the only kid with an Indian surname at that school.
	Then Glória signed a paper and stopped, hesitant.
	‘Is there something else?’
	‘I’d  like  to  know  about  the  uniforms  …  You  see  …  Father  is unemployed and we’re very poor.’
	Which was proven when the headmistress asked me to turn around so she could get an idea of my size, and saw my patches.
	She wrote a number on a piece of paper and sent us inside to look for Dona Eulália.
	Dona Eulália was also surprised at how small I was. The smallest size she had was so big I was drowning in it.
	‘This is the smallest I’ve got, but it’s too big. What a tiny child!’
	‘I can take it up.’
	She gave us two uniforms and we left. I was pleased with the present, and imagined Pinkie’s face when he saw me in new school clothes.
	As  the  days  went  by  I  told  him  everything.  What  it  was  like,  what went on there.
	‘They  ring  a  big  bell.  But  not  as  big  as  the  church  bell.  You  know, right?  Everyone  goes  into  the  main  courtyard  and  looks  for  the  placew here their teacher is. She makes us line up in fours and everyone walks into the classroom like little lambs. We all sit at desks with lids that open and close and we put our stuff inside them. I’m going to have to learn a bunch  of  anthems,  because  the  teacher said  that  to  be a  good  Brazilian and a “patriot” we have to know the anthem of our land. When I learn itI’ll sing it to you, OK, Pinkie?’
	And along came a world in which everything was new and had to be discovered afresh.

‘Hey, where are you going with that flower?’
	The girl was clean and her school books had nice covers. Her hair was in plaits.
	‘I’m taking it to my teacher.’
	‘Why?’
	‘Because  she  likes  them.  And  all  hardworking  girls  should  take flowers to their teachers.’
	‘Can boys take them too?’
	‘If you like your teacher you can.’
	‘Really?’
	‘Yes.’
	No one had taken a single flower to my teacher, Dona Cecília Paim. It must  have  been  because  she  was  ugly.  If  she  didn’t have  a  spot  on  her eye,  she  wouldn’t  have  been  so  ugly.  But  she  was  the  only  one  who would sometimes give me a tostão to buy a pastry at playtime.
	I started peering into the other classrooms and all the glasses on the teachers’ desks  had flowers  in  them. Only  my  teacher’s glass remained empty.

* * *

The biggest adventure was something else.
	‘Guess what, Pinkie. Today I went for a piggyback ride.’
	‘You rode a horse?’
	‘No, silly. When the cars drive past the school really slowly, you grab the tyre on the back and go for a piggy back. When they’re going to turn onto another street, they slow down to see if there are any cars coming, and you jump off. But carefully. ’Cause if you jump off when it’s goingfast, your bum’ll go splat on the ground and your arms’ll get all smashed up.’
	I’d chatter away to him about everything that happened in class and in the playground. You had to see how he puffed up with pride when I toldhim  that  Dona  Cecília  Paim  said  I  was  the  one  who  read  the  best.  The best  ‘readerer’.  I  wasn’t exactly  sure  about  that  and  decided  that  at  the first opportunity I would ask Uncle Edmundo if I really was a ‘readerer’.
	‘But about the piggyback, Pinkie. Just to give you an idea of what it’s like, it’s almost as good as riding on one of your branches.’
	‘But with me you’re not in any danger.’
	‘Is  that  so?  What  about  when  you  gallop  wildly  over  the  western plains when we go bison and buffalo hunting? Have you forgotten?’
	He  had  to  agree  because  he  didn’t know  how to  argue with  me  andwin.
	‘But there’s one, Pinkie  … There’s one that no  one dares piggyback on. Know which one it is? That big car that belongs to Manuel Valadares. How’s that for an ugly name? Manuel Valadares …’
	‘Yes, it is. But I’m thinking something.’
	‘You think I don’t know what you’re thinking? I know, yes. But notyet. Let me practise more … Then I’ll give it a try …’

* * *

The  days  went  past  with  great  cheer. One  morning  I  showed  up  with  a flower for my teacher. She was moved and said that I was a gentleman.
	‘Do you know what that is, Pinkie?’
	‘A gentleman is someone who is very polite, like a prince.’
	And every day I developed more and more of a taste for my lessons and applied myself even harder. There were never any complaints about me from  the  school. Glória  said  that I  left  my  little  devil in  the  drawer and became another child.
	‘Do you think it’s true, Pinkie?’
	‘I guess so.’
	‘Is that so? ’Cause I  was going  to tell  you a secret  but now  I’m notgoing to.’
	I left in a huff. But he didn’t worry about it much because he knew Inever stayed mad for long.
	The secret was going to happen at night and I was so anxious that my heart  was  almost  leaping  out  of  my  chest.  It  took  ages  for  the  factory whistle  to  go  off  and  the  people  to  go  past.  Night  took  a  long  time  toarrive  in  summer. Even  dinner  time  never  came.  I  stayed  at  the  gatewatching and didn’t have a single thought about snakes or anything else. I sat there waiting for Mother. Even Jandira found it odd, and asked if I had a stomach ache because I’d eaten unripe fruit.
	Mother’s silhouette appeared at the street corner. It was her! No one inthe world looked like her. I jumped up and ran.
	‘Hello, Mother,’ I said, kissing her hand.
	Even in the poorly lit street I could see that her face looked tired.
	‘Did you work a lot today, Mother?’
	‘Yes, son. It was so hot at the loom that no one could bear it.’
	‘Give me your bag. You’re tired.’
	I took her bag with her empty lunchbox in it.
	‘Did you get up to much mischief today?’
	‘Only a bit, Mother.’
	‘Why did you wait at the gate for me?’
	She was trying to guess.
	‘Mother, do you love me just a little?’
	‘I love you as much as I love your brothers and sisters. Why?’
	‘Mother, remember Nardinho? The hippo’s nephew?’
	‘Yes,’ she laughed.
	‘His mother made a fine suit for him. It’s green with white stripes. It has a waistcoat that buttons up to the neck. But he’s grown out of it. And he doesn’t have a younger brother who can use it. And he wants to sell it. Can you buy it?’
	‘Oh, child! Things are so difficult!’
	‘But he said you can pay in two instalments. And it isn’t expensive. It won’t even cover the cost of making it.’
	I was repeating Jacob the Money Lender’s words.
	She was quiet, doing the maths.
	‘Mother, I’m the hardest-working pupil in my class. The teacher says I’m going to get a distinction. Please buy it for me, Mother. I’ve haven’t had new clothes for such a long time …’
	Her silence was unsettling me.
	‘Look,  Mother,  if  you  don’t,  I’m  never  going  to  have  my  poet’s clothes. Lalá can make me a tie with a big bow like this out of a piece of silk she’s got …’
	‘OK, son. I’ll do a week of overtime and I’ll buy you the suit.’ Then I kissed her hand and walked next to her with my face pressed to her hand until we were inside the house.That was  how  I got  my  poet’s  clothes.  I  looked so  smart  that Uncle Edmundo took me to have my photograph taken.

* * *

School. Flower. Flower. School …
	Everything was going fine when Godofredo came into the classroom. He excused himself and asked to speak to Dona Cecília Paim. All I know is that he pointed at the flower in the glass. Then he left. She looked atme sadly.
	When class was over, she called me over.
	‘I’d like to talk to you about something, Zezé. Just a minute.’
	She rummaged in her handbag for a long time. I could tell she didn’t really  want  to  talk  to  me  and  was  searching  for  courage  among  her things. Finally, she decided.
	‘Godofredo told me something very bad about you, Zezé. Is it true?’
	I nodded.
	‘About the flower? It’s true, miss.’
	‘What exactly do you do?’
	‘I wake up early and stop by Serginho’s front garden. When the gate isn’t  closed  all  the  way,  I  slip  in  and  steal  a  flower.  But  they  have  so many that they won’t be missed.’
	‘Yes. But it’s not right. You shouldn’t do it any more. It’s not serious but it’s a kind of theft.’
	‘No it isn’t, Dona Cecília. Doesn’t the world belong to God? Doesn’t everything in the world belong to God? Then flowers belong to God too…’
	She was surprised by my logic.
	‘It  was  the  only  way,  miss.  There’s  no  garden  at my  place. Flowers cost  money  …  And  I  didn’t  want  the  glass  on  your  desk  to  always  be empty.’
	She gulped.
	‘Don’t you give me money from time to time, to buy a pastry?’
	‘I could give it to you every day. But you disappear …’‘
	I couldn’t accept it every day …’
	‘Why not?’
	‘Because there are other poor children who don’t bring anything to eat either.’
	She  pulled  a  handkerchief  out  of  her  bag  and  discreetly  dabbed  her eyes with it.
	‘Don’t you see Little Owl?’
	‘Who’s Little Owl?’
	‘The little black girl who’s my size and her mother rolls her hair up in little buns and ties string around them.’
	‘Oh, yes, you mean Dorotília.’
	‘Yes,  ma’am.  Dorotília  is  even  poorer  than  me.  And  the  other  girls don’t like to play with her because she’s black and poor. So she always stays in a corner. I share the pastry that you give me with her.’
	This  time  she  stood  there  with  the  handkerchief  pressed  to  her  nosefor a long time.
	‘Every now and then, instead of giving it to me, you could give it toher.  Her  mum  is  a  washerwoman  and  she  has  eleven  children.  All  still young. Gran gives them some rice and beans every Saturday to help themout.  And  I share  my  pastry  with  her  because  Mother  taught us  that  we should share the little we have with those who have even less.’Tears were rolling down her face now.
	‘I  didn’t  mean  to  make  you  cry.  I  promise  not  to  steal  flowers  anymore and I’m going to study even harder.’
	‘It’s not that, Zezé. Come here.’
	She took my hands in hers.
	‘I want you  to promise me  something, because you have  a beautiful heart, Zezé.’‘I  promise,  but  I  don’t  want  to  mislead  you,  ma’am.  I  don’t  have  a beautiful  heart.  You  say  that  because  you  don’t  know  what  I’m  like  athome.’
	‘It doesn’t matter. To me  you  do. From  now  on I  don’t want you  tobring me any more flowers. Only if they’re given to you. Promise?’
	‘I promise. But what about the glass? Will it always be empty?’
	‘This glass will never be empty. Whenever I look at it, I’ll always seethe most beautiful flower in the world. And I’ll think: my best pupil gave me that flower. OK?’
	Now she laughed. She let go of my hands and spoke sweetly.
	‘Now off you go, heart of gold …’




Last Chapter of Part One
‘IN A PRISON I HOPE YOU DIE’

The first very useful thing that we learned at school was the days of the week. And  once  I  had  mastered  the  days  of  the  week,  I  knew  that  hecame on Tuesday. Then I also discovered that one Tuesday he would go to the streets on the other side of the station and the next he would come to our side.
	That’s  why  that  Tuesday  I  skipped  class.  I  didn’t  want  Totoca  toknow,  or  I’d  have  to  pay  him  marbles  not  to  say  anything  at  home. Because it was early and he wouldn’t arrive until the church bells chimednine,  I  went  for  a  stroll  through  the  streets.  Streets  that  weren’t dangerous, of course. First I stopped at the church and took a look at the saints. I felt a little scared seeing the still statues, surrounded by candles. The winking candles made the saints wink too. I wasn’t sure if it would be nice to be a saint and have to be really still all the time.
	I went for a walk around the sacristy and Seu Zacarias was taking the old candles out of the candle holders and putting new ones in them. There was a pile of stubs on the table.
	‘Good morning, Seu Zacarias.’
	He stopped, moved  his  glasses to the  tip of his  nose, sniffed, turned around and replied, ‘Good morning, son.’
	‘Would you like me to help you?’
	I couldn’t stop looking at the candle stubs.
	‘Only if you want to get in the way. Didn’t you go to school today?’ he said, returning to work.
	‘I did. But the teacher didn’t come. She had a toothache.’
	‘Oh!’
	He turned around and moved his glasses to the tip of his nose again.
	‘How old are you, child?’
	‘Five. No, six. No, I’m five.’
	‘Well, is it five or six?’
	I thought about school and lied.
	‘Six.’
	‘Well, six is a good age to start Catechism classes.’
	‘Am I allowed?’
	‘Why  not?  All  you  have  to  do  is  come  every  Thursday,  at  three o’clock in the afternoon. Want to come?’
	‘That depends. If you give me the candle stubs, I’ll come.’
	‘What do you want candle stubs for?’
	The devil had already given me a nudge. I lied again.
	‘It’s to wax my kite string to make it stronger.’
	‘Then take them.’
	I  gathered  up  the  stubs  and  stuffed  them  in  my  satchel  with  myschool-books and marbles. I was deliriously happy.
	‘Thank you very much, Seu Zacarias.’
	‘Don’t forget, now. Thursday.’
	I raced out of there. It was early; there was time. I hurried to the front of  the  casino  and,  when  no  one  was  coming,  crossed  the  street  and rubbed the stubs of wax on the pavement as quickly as possible. Then Iran  back  and  sat  down  to  wait  on  the  pavement  outside  one  of  thecasino’s four closed doors. I wanted to see from a distance who would be the first to slip.
	I  was  just  about  to  give  up waiting  when,  suddenly,  plop! My  heart leapt. Dona Corinha, Nanzeazena’s mother, walked through her gate with a handkerchief and a book, and set off for the church.
	‘Holy Mother of God!’
	Dona  Corinha,  of  all  people  –  she  was  a  friend  of  Mother’s  and Nanzeazena  was  good  friends  with  Glória.  I  didn’t  want  to  watch.  I bolted for the corner and stopped to look. She had come crashing to the ground and was cursing.
	People gathered around to see if she was hurt, but judging by the way she was cursing, she must have only got a few scratches.
	‘It was those little delinquents.’
	I let out a sigh of relief. But I wasn’t so relieved that I failed to feel ahand taking hold of my satchel.
	‘That was your doing, wasn’t it, Zezé?’
	Seu  Orlando-Hair-on-Fire.  He  of  all  people,  who’d  been  our neighbour for many years. I couldn’t speak.
	‘Was it or wasn’t it?’
	‘Promise not to tell my parents?’
	‘I’m  not  going  to  tell.  But  look  here,  Zezé.  I’ll  let  it  go  this  time ’cause that woman’s a real gossip. But don’t do it again because someone could break a leg.’
	I made the most obedient face in the world and he let me go.
	I headed back to the market, waiting for him to arrive. But before that I stopped by Seu Rozemberg’s pastry shop, smiled and said, ‘Good day, Seu Rozemberg.’
	He wished me good day dryly, and didn’t offer me a sweet. Son of a bitch! He only gave me sweets when I was with Lalá.
	‘Here he comes.’
	The  clock  clanged  nine  o’clock.  He  came  like  he  always  did.  I followed  him  from  a  distance.  He  turned  onto  Rua  do  Progresso  and stopped on the corner. He put his bag on the ground and threw his jacket over his left shoulder. What a nice checked shirt! When I’m a grown-up, I thought, I’ll only wear shirts like that. He had a red kerchief around his neck and his hat was tipped back. Then he boomed in his deep voice that filled the street with cheer, ‘Gather round, my good people! Come hear what’s new!’
	His Bahian accent was lovely too.
	‘This  week’s  hits.  “Claudionor!”  “Pardon!”  …  Chico  Viola’s  latest song. Vicente Celestino’s latest success. Come learn it – it’s all the rage.’ His singsong way of speaking fascinated me.
	I wanted him to  sing ‘the bit about  Fanny’. He always  sang it and I wanted to learn. When he got to the bit that goes ‘In a prison I hope you die’, it was so beautiful I even got goose pimples. He filled his lungs and sang ‘Claudionor’.
	
	I went to dance samba in the favela
	A girl looked at me and said, hey there big fella
	But I didn’t go, my lust unfulfilled
	Her husband was strong, I could’ve been killed …
	I don’t want to be like Claudionor
	To support his family, became a stevedore …
	He would stop and announce:
	‘Brochures with song lyrics for all pockets, from one to four tostões. Sixty new tunes! The latest tangos.’
	Then he’d come to the bit I’d been waiting for. Fanny.

	One day while she was busy with chores
	He stabbed her to death behind closed doors
	For the crime of being a tart …

	(Then  his  voice  would  grow  so soft  and  sweet it  could  have  melted the hardest of hearts.)

	Poor, poor Fanny, who had a good heart
	I swear to God you’ll have reason to cry
	IN A PRISON I HOPE YOU DIE
	He stabbed her to death for being a tart
	Poor, poor Fanny, who had a good heart.

	People  would  come  out  of  their  houses  to  buy  brochures,  but  not before  studying  them  all  to  see  which  took  their  fancy.  By  this  time  I couldn’t stop following him because of Fanny.
	He turned to me with an enormous smile.
	‘Want one, boy?’
	‘No, sir. I don’t have any money.’
	‘I could tell.’
	He  picked  up  his  bag  and  strolled  a  little  further  down  the  street, shouting,  ‘The  waltzes  “Pardon”,  “Smoking,  I  Wait”  and  “Bye-byeBoys”.’ The tangos that are even more popular than ‘Night of Kings’. In the city, everyone’s singing “Heavenly Light”. It’s a beauty. Listen to the lyrics!’
	And he sang:
	
	The light in your eyes is heavenly
	I do believe that I can see
	The glow of stars in constellations
	Your eyes a well of temptations
	Stare into my eyes and see
	What moonlit love has done to me
	And just how wretched love can be …

	He made a few more announcements, sold a few more brochures and noticed me again. He stopped and beckoned me over with a finger.
	‘C’mere, finch.’
	I obeyed, smiling.
	‘Are you going to stop following me or not?’
	‘No, sir. Nobody in the world sings as beautifully as you.’
	He was flattered and a little disarmed. I was getting somewhere.
	‘But I can’t go anywhere without you following me.’
	‘It’s just that I wanted to see if you sing better than Vicente Celestino and Chico Viola. And you do.’
	He flashed a broad grin.
	‘And have you heard them, finch?’
	‘Yes, sir. On a gramophone at Dr Adaucto Luz’s house, with his son.’
	‘Then the gramophone must be old or the needle broken.’
	‘No,  sir.  It  was  a  brand-new  gramophone  that  had  just  arrived.  You really do sing a lot better. In fact, I was thinking something.’
	‘What?’
	‘I’ll follow you everywhere. You teach me how much each brochure costs. Then you sing and I sell the brochures. Everyone likes to buy from a child.’
	‘Not a bad idea,  finch. But one  thing. If you come  along, you come cause you want to. I can’t pay you anything.’
	‘But I don’t want anything.’
	‘Why’s that?’
	‘Well, I really like to sing. I like to learn. And I think the song about Fanny is the most beautiful thing in the world. Now, if you end up selling lots, you could take an old brochure that nobody wants to buy and give itto me to give to my sister.’
	He took off his hat and scratched his head where his hair was flattened down.
	‘I have an older sister called Glória and I’d give it to her. That’s all.’
	‘OK then.’
	And we  went  along, singing  and  selling.  He sang  and  I learned  as  I went.
	When it was noon, he eyed me a little suspiciously.
	‘Aren’t you going home for lunch?’
	‘Only when we finish our work.’
	He scratched his head again.
	‘Come with me.’
	We sat in a bar on Rua Ceres and he retrieved a big sandwich from the bottom  of  his  bag.  He  pulled  a  knife  out  of  his  waist-band.  A  scary looking knife. He cut off a piece of his sandwich and gave it to me. Then he  had  a  sip  of  cachaça  and  ordered  two  lemonades.  As  he  ate  his sandwich he studied me with his eyes and his eyes were very content.
	‘Y’know, finch,’ he said with a drawl. ‘You’re bringing me good luck. I’ve a row of potbellied young ’uns and I never thought to get one of ’emto give me a hand.’
	He took a long sip of lemonade.
	‘How old are you?’
	‘Five. Six … Five.’
	‘Five or six?’
	‘I still haven’t turned six.’
	‘Well, you’re a nice, intelligent little boy.’
	‘Does that mean we can meet up again next Tuesday?’
	He laughed.
	‘If you wish.’‘
	I  do.  But  I’m  going  to  have  to  arrange  it  with  my  sister.  She’ll understand. Actually, it’s good, ’cause I’ve never been to the other side of the tracks.’
	‘How do you know I go there?’
	‘I  wait  for  you  every  Tuesday,  sir.  One  Tuesday  you  come  and  the next one you don’t. So I figured you go to the other side of the tracks.’
	‘Clever boy! What’s your name?’
	‘Zezé.’
	‘I’m Ariovaldo. Shake.’
	He  took  my  hand  in  his  calloused  hands  so  we’d  be  friends  until death.

* * *

It wasn’t hard to convince Glória.
	‘But Zezé, once a week? What about school?’
	I  showed  her  my  notebook  and  my  handwriting  was  all  neat  and meticulous.  My  grades  were  excellent.  I  did  the  same  with  my  maths book.
	‘And I’m the best at reading, Gló.’
	Even then she wasn’t sure.
	‘What we’re studying now we’ll be studying for the next six months, repeating  the  same  thing  over  and  over.  Those  donkeys  take  ages  to learn.’
	She laughed.
	‘What a way to talk, Zezé.’
	‘It’s  true,  Glória,  I  learn  much  more  from  the  singing.  Want  to  see how many new things I’ve learned? Afterwards Uncle Edmundo told me what they meant. Stevedore, constellation, temptation and wretched. Andon top of it  all I’ll bring you  a brochure of song  lyrics every week and teach you the most beautiful things in the world.’
	‘Right.  But  there’s  just  one  thing.  What  do  we  tell  Father  when  he notices that you don’t come home for lunch every Tuesday?’
	‘He  won’t.  But  if  he  asks,  we  lie.  You  say  I  went  to  have  lunch  atGran’s place. That I went to take a message to Nanzeazena and stayed forlunch.’
	Holy Mary! Just as well it was only pretend because if Nanzeazena’s mother, Dona Corinha, found out what I’d done!
	Glória ended up agreeing because she knew it was a way to keep me out of mischief, and so avoid beatings. And it was nice to sit under the trees with her on Wednesday, teaching her to sing. I  couldn’t  wait  for  Tuesdays  to  come.  I  would  go  wait  for  Seu Ariovaldo at the train station. When he didn’t miss his train, he got there at eight-thirty. 
	I’d  wander  around  looking  at  everything. I  liked  to  go to  the  pastry shop  and  watch  the  people  coming  down  the  stairs  from  the  station.  It was  a  good  place  to  shine  shoes.  But  Glória  never  let  me  because  the police would chase us and take our boxes. And there were the trains, too. I could only go with Seu Ariovaldo if he gave me his hand, even if it was to take the footbridge to the other side.
	Then  he’d  arrive,  all  flustered.  After  the  song  about  Fanny,  he  was convinced that I knew what the people liked to buy.
	We’d go sit on the wall of the station, across from the factory garden, and he’d open the brochure and show me the song, singing the first bit. When I didn’t think it was good, he’d find another one.
	‘This one’s new: “Spoiled”.’
	He sang it.
	‘Sing it again.’
	He repeated the last verse.
	‘That’s  the  one,  Seu  Ariovaldo,  plus  Fanny  and  the  tangos;  we’re going to sell out.’
	And  we’d  go  through  the  dusty,  sunlit  streets.  We  were  the  joyful birds who confirmed that summer was coming. His big, beautiful voice opened the window of the morning.
	‘The  hit  of  the  week,  the  month,  the  year:  “Spoiled”,  recorded  by Chico Viola.’

	The full moon casts a silver sheen
	On the mountain, lush and green
	The serenader’s trusty strings
	His love to the window bring.

	A heartfelt tune is gently spun
	Sweet lyre deftly plucked and strummed
	The crooner opens the floodgates
	to all his lovesick heart’s dictates …

	Then he’d pause a moment, nod twice and I would come in with my pure little voice.

	No fairer vision ever seen
	You are my light, you are my queen
	If up to me, you’ll never toil
	Clever girl, you’ll be spoiled.

	You should have seen it! Girls would come running to buy brochures. Gentlemen,  people  of  all  ages  and types.  I  really  liked selling  the  ones that cost four or five tostões. When it was a woman I knew what to do.
	‘Here’s your change, ma’am.’
	‘Keep it and buy yourself a sweet.’
	I was even beginning to talk like Seu Ariovaldo. At  noon  we’d  head  into  the  first  tavern  we  saw  and  chomp,  chomp, chomp, devour his sandwich, sometimes with an orange soda, sometimes a red one.
	Then I’d  stick my  hand into  my change  pocket and  spread  it out  on the table.
	‘Here, Seu Ariovaldo.’
	And  I’d  push the  coins towards  him. He’d  smile and  say,  ‘You’re  agood kid, Zezé.’
	‘Seu Ariovaldo,’ I asked him one day. ‘Why did you used to call me finch?’
	‘Back in Bahia, where I’m from, it means a little kid, a small child.’
	He  scratched  his  head  and  covered  his  mouth  to  burp.  Then  he excused  himself  and  took  a  toothpick  to  clean  his  teeth.  The  money stayed where it was.
	‘I’ve been thinking, Zezé. From now on you can keep the tips. Afterall, we’re a duo now.’
	‘What’s a duo?’
	‘When two people sing together.’
	‘Then can I buy a sweet?’
	‘It’s your money. You can do what you want with it.’
	‘Thanks, champ.’
	He laughed at the imitation. Now I was the one eating the sweet and looking at him.
	‘Am I really a duo?’
	‘You are now.’
	‘Then let me sing  the part about  Fanny’s  heart. You sing loudly  and I’ll  join  you  in  the  bit  about  the  heart,  with  the  sweetest  voice  in  the world.’
	‘That’s not a bad idea, Zezé.’
	‘So, after lunch, let’s start with Fanny, ’cause it’s really good luck.’
	And under the blazing sun we went back to work.
	We  were  in  the  middle  of  Fanny  when  disaster  struck.  Along  came Dona Maria da Penha looking all prim under her parasol, her face white with  rice  powder.  She  stopped  and  stood  listening  to  us  sing.  Seu Ariovaldo saw tragedy coming and gave me a nudge to walk as I sang.
	But I was so caught up in Fanny’s heart that I paid no attention.
	Dona Maria da Penha closed her parasol and stood there tapping thetoe  of  her  shoe  with  it.  When  I  finished,  she  scowled  angrily  and exclaimed, ‘My, my. What an immoral song for a child to be singing.’
	‘There’s nothing immoral about my work, ma’am. Any honest work is work, and I am not ashamed of it!’
	I’d  never  seen  Seu  Ariovaldo  so  annoyed.  Maria  da  Penha  was looking for a fight, and she got it.
	‘Is that child your son?’
	‘No, ma’am, ’fraid not.’
	‘Your nephew, a relative?’
	‘Nope.’
	‘How old is he?’
	‘Six.’
	She sized me up with a doubtful expression and continued. ‘Are you not ashamed to be exploiting a young child?’
	‘I’m  not  exploiting  him  at  all,  ma’am.  He  sings  with  me  ’cause  he wants to and ’cause he enjoys it. And I pay him, don’t I?’
	I nodded. I was loving the fight. I felt like headbutting her in the belly to see the noise she’d make when she hit the ground. Boom!
	‘Well, I’ll have you know I am going to do something about this. I amgoing to speak to the priest. I’m going to child welfare. I’m going to thepolice.’
	Then  her  mouth  snapped  shut  and  her  eyes  opened  wide  with  fear. Ariovaldo  had  pulled  out  his  enormous  knife  and  taken  a  step  towards her. She looked like she was about to throw a fit.
	‘Well, go ahead, ma’am. But go quickly. I’m a good man, but I do liketo cut out the tongues of tongue-wagging witches who stick their noses in where they’re not wanted …’
	She tottered off, as stiff as a broomstick, and once at a distance turned and pointed her parasol.
	‘You’ll see!’
	‘Skedaddle, you shooshy old witch!’
	She opened her parasol and disappeared down the street, stiff as could be.

* * *

In the late afternoon, Seu Ariovaldo was counting the profits.
	‘We sold out, Zezé. You were right. You bring me good luck.’
	I remembered Dona Maria da Penha.
	‘Do you think she’s going to do something?’
	‘’Course  not,  Zezé.  At  the  most,  she’ll  talk  to  the  priest  and  the priest’ll say, “Best let it go, Maria. There’s no messing with these people from the North.”’
	He  put  the  money  in  his  pocket  and  rolled  up  his  bag.  Then,  as always, he put his hand in his pocket and pulled out a folded brochure.
	‘This is for  your sister Glória.’  He stretched. ‘It  was  a helluva good day!’
	We rested for a moment.
	‘Ariovaldo.’
	‘S’up?’
	‘What’s a shooshy old witch?’
	‘How  am  I  supposed  to  know,  son?  I  made  it  up  in  the  heat  of  the moment,’ he said with a chuckle.
	‘And were you really going to poke a hole in her?’
	‘’Course not. That was just to spook her.’
	‘If you did poke a hole in her, would guts or straw come out?’
	He laughed and ruffled my hair in a friendly manner.
	‘Know what, Zezé? I think shit would come out.’We both laughed.
	‘But don’t be scared. I can’t kill a thing. Not even a chicken. I’m so scared of the missus that I even let her beat me with the broom stick.’
	We stood and walked to the station. He shook my hand and said, ‘Justto be safe, we’ll steer clear of that street for a few weeks.’
	He squeezed my hand even more tightly.
	‘See ya next week, champ.’
	I nodded while he slowly climbed the stairs.
	From up top he shouted, ‘You’re an angel, Zezé!’
	I said goodbye and started to laugh.
	Angel? If only he knew …





Part Two
WHEN THE BABY JESUS APPEARED IN ALL HIS SADNESS




Chapter One
PIGGYBACKS


‘Chop chop, Zezé, or you’ll be late for school!’
	I was sitting at the table, drinking a cup of coffee and chewing a piece of bread without any hurry. As always, I had my elbow on the table and was staring at the piece of paper on the wall.
	Glória always got flustered. She couldn’t wait for us to disappear for the morning and leave her in peace with the housework.
	‘Get a move on, you little rascal. You haven’t even combed your hair! You should follow Totoca’s example – he’s always ready on time.’
	She fetched a comb and ran it through my blond fringe.
	‘Not that there’s anything to comb on this little goldilocks.’
	She  made  me  stand  and  then  looked  me  up  and  down  to  see  if  my shirt and trousers were decent.
	‘Now let’s go, Zezé.’
	Totoca  and  I  slung  our  satchels  over  our  shoulders.  Just  textbooks, notebooks and pencils inside. No snacks – they were for other children. Glória patted  the bottom  of my  satchel,  felt the  marbles and  smiled. We  carried our  tennis shoes  in our hands  to put  on when  we got  to the market, near school.
	The  minute  we  were  outside,  Totoca  would  bolt  off,  leaving  me  to amble along on my own. That’s when my inner imp would begin to wake up. I actually liked it when Totoca went on ahead so that I could do mything  in  peace.  I  was  fascinated  with  the  highway.  A  piggyback. Definitely a piggyback. To cling to the back of a car and feel the highway blowing  wind  in  your  face,  whooshing  and  whistling.  It  was  the  best thing in the world. We all did it. Totoca had taught me, telling me over and over to hold on tight, because the cars behind us were dangerous. We slowly  learned  to  overcome  our  fear,  and  our  sense  of  adventure prompted us to attempt even more difficult piggybacks. I was getting so bold  that  I’d  even  piggybacked  on  Seu  Ladislau’s  car.  The  only  one  I hadn’t been on was the Portuguese’s beautiful vehicle. What a fine, well-kept car that was. The tyres always brand new. The metal so  shiny you could see  your reflection in  it. I  loved the  sound of  the horn:  a gravelymoo, like a cow in a field. The Portuguese would drive past sitting stiffly in  his  seat,  master  of  all  that  beauty,  wearing  the  biggest  scowl  in  the world.  No  one  dared  piggyback  on  his  back  wheel.  They  said  he  beat people up, killed them, and even threatened to cut off their balls before he killed them. None of the boys from school had dared to, until now.
	When  I  was  talking  about  it  with  Pinkie,  he  said,  
	‘No  one  at  all,Zezé?’
	‘No one at all. They don’t dare.’
	I  sensed  that  Pinkie  was  laughing,  and  he  could  tell  what  I  was thinking.
	‘But you’re just dying to do it, aren’t you?’
	‘To be honest, I am. I think …’
	‘What do you think?’
	Now I was the one laughing.‘
	C’mon, tell me.’
	‘You’re so nosy.’
	‘You always tell me – you always end up telling me. You can’t help yourself.’
	‘Hey,  Pinkie.  I  leave  home  at  seven  o’clock  in  the  morning,  right?When I get to the corner it’s five past seven. Then, at ten past seven, the Portuguese stops his car at the corner outside the Misery and Hunger and goes in to buy a packet of cigarettes … One of these days I’m going to pluck up the courage and wait for him to get back into the car and pow!’
	‘You don’t dare.’
	‘Don’t I, Pinkie? I’ll show you.’
	Now my heart was thumping. The car stopped, the Portuguese got out. Pinkie’s challenge played on my fear and my courage; I didn’t want to, but  pride  made  me  quicken  my  step.  I  walked  around  the  bar  and  hid behind the corner, stuffing my shoes in my satchel while I was there. My heart  was  beating  so  fast  I  was  afraid  they’d  hear  it  in  the  bar.  The Portuguese  came  back  out  without  even  noticing  me.  I  heard  the  door open …
	‘It’s now or never, Pinkie!’ I whispered.
	I jumped onto the tyre and clung to it with all my strength fuelled by my fear. I knew it was a long way to the school. I could already see the look on my classmates’ faces when they learned of my prowess …
	‘Aahh!’
	I  cried  out  so loudly  that people  raced  to the  door of  the bar  to  see who had been run over. 
	I was suspended two feet above the ground, wriggling and writhing. My  ears  were  burning  like  red-hot  coals.  My  plan  had  gone  wrong somehow. In my haste, I’d forgotten to listen for the engine to start.
	The Portuguese’s scowl looked even bigger than usual. His eyes were shooting sparks.
	‘Well,  well, toerag.  So,  it’s you,  huh? You’ve  got  a  lot  of  cheek  for such a little squirt!’
	He allowed my feet to touch the ground, let go of one of my ears and threatened me with his burly arm.
	‘Do you think I didn’t see you checking out my car every day, toerag? I’m going to make sure you never try that again.’
	The humiliation hurt more than the physical pain. All I wanted to do was fire off a volley of swear words at the brute. But he wouldn’t let go of  me  and,  as  if  reading  my  mind,  shook  his  free  fist  in  my  face  and growled,  ‘Say  something  then,  toerag!  Swear!  Why  don’t  you  say anything?’
	My  eyes  filled  with  tears;  it  was  the  pain,  the  humiliation,  the sniggering onlookers.The Portuguese carried on shouting.
	‘Why don’t you swear at me, toerag?’
	A cruel fury rose up in my chest and I managed to splutter angrily, ‘I might not be saying anything, but I’m thinking it. And when I grow up I’m going to kill you.’
	He laughed, followed by everyone standing around us.
	‘Well,  grow  up,  then,  toerag.  I’ll  be  waiting  for  you.  But  first  I’m going to teach you a lesson.’
	He quickly let go of my ear and bent me over his thigh. He walloped me only once, but so hard it felt like he’d sent my back-side through my stomach. Only then did he let me go.
	I staggered away with the roar of the crowd ringing in my ears. It was only when I got to the other side of the highway, which I crossed without seeing a thing, that I was able to rub my stinging rump. The bastard! I’d show him. I swore I’d get even. I swore that … but the pain eased off as I put  distance  between  myself  and  those  sons  of  bitches.  It’d  be  worse when the kids at school found out. And what was I going to tell Pinkie? For  a  week,  whenever  I  passed  the  Misery  and  Hunger  they’d  be laughing at me, in all their grown-up cowardice. I’d have to leave earlier and cross the highway further down …
	I  approached  the  market  with  these  thoughts  running  through  my mind. I washed my feet in the fountain and put on my shoes. Totoca was waiting  for  me  anxiously.  I  wasn’t  going  to  breathe  a  word  about  my humiliation.
	‘Zezé, you’ve gotta help me.’
	‘What’ve you done?’
	‘Remember Bié?’
	‘That big kid from Rua Barão de Capanema?’
	‘That’s the one. He’s going to get me at the gate after school. Can you fight him for me?’
	‘But he’ll kill me.’
	‘No, he won’t, and anyway, you’re brave and a good fighter.’
	‘Alright. At the gate?’
	‘At the gate.’
	Totoca always did that. He’d get in a fight and then he’d have me sort it  out.  But  it  was  a  good  thing.  I  would  take  out  all  my  anger  at  the Portuguese on Bié.
	But that day I took such a beating that I came out with a black eye and my  arms  all  scratched  up.  Totoca  knelt  on  the  ground  with  the  others, cheering  me  on,  a  pile  of  books  on  his  knees:  mine  and  his.  He  also shouted instructions.
	‘Headbutt him in the belly, Zezé. Bite him, dig in your nails – he’s alllard. Kick him in the balls.’
	But even with all the cheering and instructions, if it weren’t for Seu Rozemberg, Bié would have made mincemeat of me. He came out from behind  the  counter,  grabbed  Bié  by  the  collar  of  his  shirt  and  knocked him around a bit.
	‘Have you no shame? A child your size beating up a little kid.’
	Everyone at home said that Seu Rozemberg had a secret crush on my sister  Lalá.  He  knew  us  and  whenever  she  was  with  us,  he’d  hand  out pastries  and  sweets  with  the  biggest  of  smiles  dotted  with  several  gold teeth.

* * *

I couldn’t help myself and ended up telling Pinkie about my humiliation. I could hardly hide it with that puffy black eye. Besides, when Father had seen  me  like  that,  he’d  given  me  a  few  raps  on  the  head  and  Totoca  adressing-down. Father never hit Totoca, but he did me, because I was as bad as it got.
	Pinkie must have heard every word, so how could I not tell him? He listened, indignant, and only when I finished did he say angrily, ‘What a coward!’
	‘The fight was nothing. You should have seen …’
	Blow  by  blow,  I  relayed  everything  that  had  happened  with  the piggyback. Pinkie was amazed at how brave I’d been and said, ‘One day you’ll get even.’
	‘Yes,  I  will.  I’m  going  to  borrow  Tom  Mix’s  revolver  and  Fred Thompson’s  Silver  King  and  I’ll  ambush  him  with  the  Comanche Indians.  One  day  I’ll  bring  home  his  scalp,  flapping  in  the  wind  on  a bamboo stick.’
	But my anger quickly wore off and soon we were talking about other things.
	‘Sweetie, guess what? Remember how last week I won that book The Magic Rose for being a good pupil?’
	Pinkie liked it when I called him Sweetie; it let him know that I really loved him.
	‘Yes.’
	‘Well, I’ve already read it. It’s a story about a prince who is given ared and white rose by a fairy. The lucky fellow rides a  handsome steed “all festooned  with  gold”  –  that’s  what  it  says  in  the  book.  And on  the steed  all  festooned  with  gold  he  goes  off  in  search  of  adventure. Whenever  he’s  in  danger  he  shakes  the  magic  rose  and  a  big  cloud  of smoke appears so the prince can escape. To be honest, Pinkie, I think thestory’s  a  bit  silly,  you  know?  It’s  not  like  the  adventures that  I  want  to
have  in  my  life.  Tom  Mix  and  Buck  Jones  have  real  adventures.  And Fred Thompson and Richard Talmadge. Because they know how to fight, to shoot, to throw punches … If they had to pull out a magic rose everytime they found themselves in danger, it’d be no fun at all. What do you think?’
	‘Yeah, that’d be no fun.’
	‘But that isn’t what I want to know. I want to know if you believe a rose can do magic like that.’
	‘It does sound pretty weird.’
	‘People tell stories and think children believe everything.’
	‘True.’
	We  heard  a  noise.  It  was  Luís  coming  over.  My  little  brother  was becoming more and more beautiful. He wasn’t a cry baby or the sort to throw tantrums. Even when I had to look after him, most of the time I did so willingly. 
	I told Pinkie, ‘Let’s change the subject, because I’m going to tell him the story and he’s going to love it. We shouldn’t ruin a child’s illusions.’
	‘Zezé, let’s play?’
	‘I’m already playing. What do you want to play?’
	‘I want to go to the zoo.’
	I  looked  at  the  chicken  coop  with  the  black  hen  and  her  two  new chicks, without enthusiasm.
	‘It’s too late. The  lions are already asleep and the Bengal tigers too. It’ll be closed by now. They won’t let us in.’
	‘Then let’s travel around Europe.’
	The bright spark learned and repeated everything he heard perfectly. But,  to  be  honest,  I  wasn’t in  the mood  to  travel  around  Europe  either. What I really wanted was to hang out with Pinkie. Pinkie didn’t tease me or make fun of my puffy eye.
	I sat beside my little brother and spoke calmly.
	‘Just wait a second. I’ll think of something for us to play.’
	Presently,  the  fairy  of  innocence  flew  past  on  a  white  cloud  that ruffled  the  leaves  on  the  trees,  the  grasses  in  the  ditch  and  Pinkie’s leaves. A smile lit up my battered face.
	‘Was that you, Pinkie?’
	‘I didn’t do anything.’
	‘Oh, goody, then it’s the windy season coming.’
	On our street there were all kinds of seasons. The marble season. The spinning top season. The season to collect movie-star trading cards. The kite season was the most beautiful of them all. The skies would fill with kites of every colour. Beautiful kites of every shape and size. It was war in the air. Headlong collisions, battles, lassoing and line cutting.
	Razors would cut strings and kites would go wheeling through space,out  of  kilter,  tangling  bridles  and  tails;  it  was  all  beautiful.  The  world belonged to the kids in the street. In all the streets of Bangu. Then there’d be  kite  skeletons  tangled  in  the  electric  wires,  and  we’d  all  run  away from  the  power  company truck.  The  men would  come  and angrily  pull down the dead kites. The wind … the wind …
	With the wind came the idea.
	‘Let’s play hunting, Luís.’
	‘I can’t ride the horse.’
	‘Soon  you’ll  be  big  enough  and  you’ll  be  able to.  You  sit  there  and watch how it’s done.’
	Suddenly  Pinkie  became  the  most  beautiful  horse  in  the  world,  the wind  blew  stronger,  and  the  scraggy  grasses  in  the  ditch  became  vast, lush plains. My cowboy outfit was festooned with gold. A sheriff’s star flashed on my chest.
	‘Let’s go, little horse, go. Run, run …’
	Thubalup-thubalup-thubalup!  I  was  back  with  Tom  Mix  and  Fred Thompson.  Buck  Jones  hadn’t  wanted  to  come  this  time  and  Richard Talmadge was working on another film.
	‘Go,  go,  little  horse.  Run,  run.  Here  come  our  Apache  friends churning up dust as they ride.’
	Thubalup-thubalup-thubalup!  The  Indians’  horses  were  making  a racket.
	‘Run, run,  little  horse,  the plains  are  full  of bison  and  buffalo. Let’s shoot, folks. Bang, bang, bang! Pow, pow, pow!’
	‘Phwoo, Phwoo, Phwoo!’ whistled the arrows.
	The  wind,  the  speed,  the  wild  gallop,  the  clouds  of  dust  and  Luís’s voice almost shouting.
	‘Zezé! Zezé!’
	I slowly reined in my horse and jumped down, flushed from the ride.
	‘What’s the matter? Did a buffalo come your way?’
	‘No.  Let’s  play  something  else.  There  are  lots  of  Indians  and  I’m scared.’
	‘But these are Apaches. They’re our friends.’
	‘But I’m scared. There are lots of them.’



Chapter Two
MAKING FRIENDS


For the next few days I left for school a little earlier to avoid running into the  Portuguese  buying  cigarettes.  I  also  took  care  to  slip  around  the corner on the other side of the street, which was almost completely in the shade  of  the  hedges  in  front  of  the  houses.  The  minute  I  got  to  the highway, I would cross over and carry on, shoes in hand, staying close to the  large  factory  wall.  But  my  efforts  were  pointless.  The  street  has  a short memory and  soon no one  remembered yet another of  Seu Paulo’s boy’s antics. Because that’s how I was known when I was being accused of something: ‘It was Seu Paulo’s boy.’ ‘It was that boy of Seu Paulo’s.’‘It was that little troublemaker of Seu Paulo’s.’ Once they even came up with  a  horrible  joke:  when  the  Bangu  Football  Club  was  thrashed  by Andaraí, people joked, ‘Bangu took more of a beating than Seu Paulo’s boy!’
	Sometimes I’d see the goddam car at the corner and I’d hang back soas not to  have to see  the Portuguese—I really was  going to kill when I grew up—strutting his stuff as the owner of the most beautiful car in the world and in Bangu.
	That was when he disappeared for a few days. What a relief! He must have gone out of  town or taken a  vacation. Once again  I  could walk to school with a calm heart, and I was already beginning to doubt whether i twas  really  worth  killing  him  later  on.  One  thing  was  for  sure:  withou tfail, when I went for a piggy back on a less important car, I no longer felt the same thrill and my ears would begin to sting terribly.
	Life  in  the  street  went  on  as  always.  Kite  season  had  come  and  we were  always  outside.  The  blue  sky  would  be  dotted  with  the  most beautiful, colourful stars during the day. As it was the windy time of year I didn’t spend as much time with Pinkie, only going to see him  when  I was  grounded,  after  a  beating.  I  never  tried  to  sneak  out  when  I  was grounded; being beaten twice in a row hurt a lot. Instead I would go withKing  Luís  to  festoon  –  I  loved  that  word  –  my  orange  tree.  As  it happened, Pinkie had grown a lot and soon would be giving me flower sand fruit. Other orange trees took a long time. But my sweet-orange tree was ‘precocious’, which is how Uncle Edmundo described me. Then he told  me  what  it  meant:  something  that’s  ready  a  long  time  before everything  else.  Actually,  I  don’t  think  he  knew  how  to  explain  it properly. It just meant anything that came first.
	So I’d fetch bits of rope, scraps of thread, make holes in a bunch of bottle  tops  and  go  festoon  Pinkie.  You  should  have  seen  how  smart  he looked.  When  the  wind  blew,  the  bottle  tops  would  clink  against  one another  and  he  looked  like  he  was  wearing  the  spurs  Fred  Thompson wore when he rode Silver King. 
	School  life  was  good,  too.  I  knew  all  the  national  anthems  off  by heart. The big one was the real one. The others were the hymn to the flag and  the  one  that  went  Liberty,  Liberty,  spread  your  wings  over  us.  For me, and I think for Tom Mix too, it was the best. Whenever we went for a ride,  except  when  we  were  at  war  or  on  a  hunt,  he’d  say  respectfully, ‘C’mon, Apinajé warrior, sing the anthem of liberty.’
	My  high-pitched  voice  would  fill  the  vast  plains,  even  more beautifully than when I sang with Seu Ariovaldo in my job as a singer’s helper on Tuesdays.
	Every Tuesday, I would skip school to wait for the train that brought my  friend  Ariovaldo.  He’d  come  down  the  stairs  holding  up  thebrochures  of  song  lyrics  that  we’d sell  on  the streets.  He’d  be  carrying two more full bags too, which were our backup. He almost always sold everything and this made both of us very happy.
	At  school  recess,  when  there  was  time,  we’d  play  marbles.  I  was really  good  at  it.  My  aim  was  spot  on  and  I  almost  never  went  home without my satchel jiggling with my winnings, often triple the number of marbles I’d gone with. 
	My teacher, Dona Cecília Paim, was really sweet. You could tell her I was the most terrible boy on my street, and she wouldn’t believe it. She didn’t believe that I knew more swear words than anyone else in class, or that no one got up to as much mischief as me. She refused to believe it. At school I was an angel. I was never told off and had become the darling of all the teachers, as I was one of the youngest kids who had ever been there. Dona Cecília Paim  could see our  poverty from a mile off and, at break time, when everyone else was eating their snack, she’d take pity onme, call me over and send me off to buy a sweet pastry. She was so fond of me that I think I was good just so she wouldn’t be disappointed with me.
	Suddenly,  it  happened.  I  was  walking  along  the  highway  slowly,  as always, when the Portuguese’s car drove past, very close. He honked the horn three times and I saw that the monster was smiling at me. All over again  I  felt  angry  and  wanted  to  kill  him  when  I  grew  up.  I  scowled haughtily and pretended to ignore him.

* * *

‘It’s like I said, Pinkie. Every single day. It’s as if he waits for me to gop ast and then he comes along and beeps his horn three times. Yesterday he even waved.’
	‘What did you do?’
	‘I don’t care. I pretend not to see him. He’s starting to get scared, you see. I’ll be six soon and it won’t be long before I’m a man.’
	‘Do you think he wants to be your friend because he’s scared?’
	‘I’m sure of it. Wait a second, I’m going to get the crate.’Pinkie  had  grown  a  lot.  I  had  to  stand  on  a  crate  to  climb  into  his saddle now.
	‘There, now we can talk properly.’
	Up  high  there  I  felt  bigger  than  everything.  I’d  look  around  at  the landscape, at the grass in the ditch, at the tanagers and finches that came to  look  for  food.  At  night,  darkness  would  barely  have  fallen  when another  Luciano  would  come  swooping  happily  around  my  head  like aplane  at  the  Campo  dos  Afonsos  air  base.  At  first  even  Pinkie  was surprised that I wasn’t afraid, because most children are terrified of bats. Come  to  think  of  it,  Luciano  hadn’t  appeared  for  days.  He  must  have found other Campo dos Afonsos air bases to fly around.
	‘Did you know, Pinkie, the guavas at Eugênia’s house are starting to turn yellow. They must be just about ripe. The problem is if she catches me.  I’ve  already  been  beaten  three  times  today.  I’m  here  because  I’m grounded …’
	But the devil gave me a hand down and pulled me over to the hedge.The afternoon breeze was starting to waft the smell of the guavas to my nose,  so  it  seemed.  I  peered through  the  hedge,  pushed a  branch  aside, heard no noise … And the devil was saying, ‘Go on, silly, can’t you see there’s no one there? She must have gone to the Japanese lady’s grocerystore.  Seu  Benedito?  Don’t  worry.  He’s  practically  blind  and  deaf.  He can’t see a thing. There’s time to run away if he notices.’
	I  followed  the  hedge  to  the  ditch  and  decided.  First,  I  signalled  to Pinkie to be quiet. By now my heart was racing. There was no messing with Eugênia. God knows she had a tongue on her
	.I  was  tiptoeing  along,  holding  my  breath,  when  her  voice  boomed from the kitchen window.
	‘What’s going on, boy?’
	It  didn’t even  occur  to me  to  lie and  say  I’d come  to  fetch a  ball.  I bolted and jumped into the ditch with a splash. But something else was waiting for me there.  A pain so intense  that I almost  screamed,  but if I screamed I’d get beaten twice: first, because I’d left the backyard when I was  grounded,  and  second,  because  I’d  been  stealing  guavas  from  the neighbour and had just managed to get a shard of glass in my left foot.
	Still giddy with pain, I tugged at the glass. I moaned quietly and saw the blood swirling into the dirty water in the ditch. What now? My eyes brimming with  tears,  I  managed  to  remove  the  glass,  but  I  had  no idea how to staunch the flow of blood. I was squeezing my ankle hard to ease the pain. I had to stay strong. Night had almost fallen, and with it, Father, Mother  and  Lalá  would  arrive  home.  If  any  of  them  caught  me  they’d beat  me.  Or  they’d  each  beat  me  separately.  I  climbed  over  the  barrier and hopped over to my orange tree, where I sat down. It still hurt a lot,but I didn’t feel like I was going to be sick any more.
	‘Look, Pinkie.’
	Pinkie  was  horrified.  He  was  like  me—he  didn’t  like  the  sight  of blood.
	Oh Lord, what was I going to do?
	Totoca  would  have  helped  me,  but  where  was  he  now?  There  was Glória. She  was in  the kitchen,  no doubt.  Glória was  the only  one who didn’t like the fact that everyone was always beating me. She might givemy ears a tug or ground me again. But I had to try.
	I dragged myself to the kitchen door, trying to think of a way to win Glória’s  sympathy.  She  was  embroidering  something.  I  sat  down awkwardly and  this time  God helped  me. She  looked over  and saw  mewith  my  head  down.  She  didn’t  say  anything  because  I  was  grounded. My eyes welled up with tears and I sniffed. I found her eyes on me again. She had stopped embroidering.
	‘What is it, Zezé?’
	‘Nothing, Gló … Why doesn’t anyone love me?’
	‘You get up to a lot of mischief.’
	‘I’ve been beaten three times today, Gló.’
	‘And didn’t you deserve it?’
	‘That’s  not  it.  It’s  just  that  because  no  one  loves  me,  they  take everything out on me.’
	Glória’s fifteen-year-old heart was beginning to thaw, and I could feelit.
	‘I think it’s best if a car runs over me on the highway tomorrow and squashes me completely.’Then the tears came streaming down in torrents.
	‘Nonsense, Zezé. I love you lots.’
	‘No you don’t. If you did, you wouldn’t let them beat me again today.’
	‘It’s getting dark now and there won’t be enough time for you to get in trouble again.’
	‘But I already have …’
	She  put  down  her  embroidery  and  came  over.  She  almost  screamed when she saw the puddle of blood at my foot.
	‘My God! Shrimp, what’ve you done?’
	I’d won. If she called me shrimp, I was safe.
	She picked me up and sat me down on the chair. Then she quickly got a bowl of salty water and knelt at my feet.‘This is going to hurt a lot, Zezé.’
	‘It’s already hurting a lot.’
	‘My God, the cut’s  almost an inch and a half long. How did you do it?’
	‘Don’t tell anyone. Please, Gló, I promise to be good. Don’t let them hit me so much …’
	‘OK, I won’t tell. But what are we going to do? Everyone’s going to see your foot all bandaged up. And tomorrow you won’t be able to go to school. They’re going to find out.’
	‘I’ll  go  to  school.  I’ll  wear  my  shoes  to  the  corner.  After  that I  can take them off.’
	‘You need to lie down and put your foot up, otherwise you won’t evenbe able to walk tomorrow.’
	She helped me limp over to my bed.
	‘I’ll bring you something to eat before the others get home.’
	When she came back with the food, I couldn’t help myself and gave her a kiss. I hardly ever did that. 

* * *

When  everyone  had  assembled  for  dinner,  Mother  noticed  that  I  was missing.
	‘Where’s Zezé?’
	‘He’s lying down. He’s been complaining of a headache all day.’ I listened in ecstasy, momentarily forgetting how much my foot hurt. I liked being the  topic of conversation. That  was when Glória  decided to stick up for me. She put on a voice that was sorrowful and accusatory at the same time.
	‘I think everyone’s been hitting him. And today he was in really bad shape. Three beatings is too much.’
	‘But  he’s  always  up  to  no  good.  He  only  stops  when  he  gets  a paddling! Do you mean to say you never lay a finger on him?’
	‘Hardly ever. At the most, I give his ears a tug.’ They all fell silent and Glória went on.
	‘After  all,  he  isn’t  even  six  yet.  Yes,  he’s  naughty,  but  he’s  still a child.’
	That conversation pleased me no end.

* * *

Glória was fretting as she got me dressed, helping me to put on my shoes.
	‘Are you OK to go?’
	‘I’ll be fine.’
	‘You’re not going to do something silly on the highway, are you?’
	‘Nope.’
	‘Was it true what you said?’
	‘No. It’s just that I was really sad ’cause I thought no one loved me.’
	She ran her hands over my fine blond hair and sent me off.
	I  thought  it  would  only  be  hard  until  I  got  to  the  highway  and  that once I took off my shoes, the pain would ease up. But when my bare foot touched  the  ground  it  was  too  much  and  I  had  to  go  slowly,  leaning against the wall of the factory. At that rate I’d never get there.
	Then  the  thing  happened.  The  horn  honked  three  times.  Damn!  It wasn’t enough that I was dying of pain and here he was to bully me.
	The  car  pulled  up  alongside  me.  He  stuck  his  body  out  and  called, ‘Hey squirt, you hurt your foot?’
	I  felt  like  saying  that  it  was  none  of  his  business.  But  because  he hadn’t called me toerag, I didn’t reply and kept walking. He  started  the  car  again,  passed  me  and  pulled  over  onto  the pavement, blocking me. He opened the door and got out, his large body towering over mine.
	‘Is it hurting a lot, squirt?
	It wasn’t possible that a person who had beaten me was now speaking in  such  a  gentle,  almost  friendly,  voice.  He  came  even  closer  and, unexpectedly, knelt down and looked me in the eye. His smile was so soft it seemed to radiate affection.
	‘It looks like you’ve really hurt yourself. What happened?’
	I sniffed a little before replying.
	‘Piece of glass.’
	‘Is it deep?’
	I showed him with my fingers.
	‘Oh! That’s serious. Why didn’t you stay home? You’re on your way to school, aren’t you?’
	‘My parents don’t know I hurt myself. If they find out they’ll beat meto teach me not to get hurt.’
	‘Come with me, I’ll take you.
	’‘No, thank you, sir.’
	‘Why not?’
	‘Everyone at school knows what happened that time.’
	‘But you can’t walk like that.’
	It was true. I hung my head, feeling that my pride was about to take a tumble.
	He lifted my head up by the chin.
	‘Let’s forget a few things. Ever been in a car?
	’‘No, sir, never.’
	‘Then I’m going to give you a lift.’
	‘I can’t. We’re enemies.’
	‘I don’t care. If you’re ashamed, I’ll drop you off before we get to the school. OK?’
	I was so moved I didn’t even reply. I just nodded. He picked me up, opened  the  door  and  sat  me carefully  in  the  passenger seat.  He  walked around  the  car  and  got  in.  Before  starting  the  engine,  he  smiled  at  meagain.
	‘That’s better, see.’
	The  lovely  feeling  of  the  car  cruising  along,  with  the  occasional jiggle, made me close my eyes and begin to dream. It was smoother and nicer  than  Fred  Thompson’s  horse,  Silver  King.  But  it  wasn’t  for  long because when  I  opened  my  eyes  we  were  almost  at  the  school.  I  could already see the crowd of school children swarming through the front gate. Terrified, I slid off the seat and hid. I said angrily, ‘You promised to stop before we got to the school.’
	‘I  changed  my  mind.  That  foot  of  yours  can’t  be  left  like  that.  You could get tetanus.
	’I couldn’t even ask what that beautiful, tricky word was. I also knew it was  pointless  saying  I  didn’t  want  to  go.  The  car  turned  onto  Rua  dasCasinhas and I returned to the seat.
	‘You strike me as a brave little man. Let’s go see if it’s true.’
	He  pulled  up  in  front  of  the  pharmacy  and  carried  me  inside  in  his arms.  When  Dr  Adaucto  Luz  came  to  help  us,  I  was  terrified.  He  was doctor  to  the  factory  staff  and  knew  Father  well.  And  my  fear  grew bigger when he me looked at me and asked straight off the bat, ‘You’re Paulo Vasconcelos’s son, aren’t you? Has he found a position yet?’
	I  had  to  answer,  although  I  was  ashamed  that  the  Portuguese  now knew that Father was unemployed.
	‘He’s waiting. He’s been promised a lot of things …’
	‘Well, let’s get down to business.’
	He peeled back the cloth stuck to the cut and let out an ‘uh-oh’ that frightened me. My lips began to quiver. But the Portuguese came to my rescue.
	They sat  me on  a table  covered with  white  sheets. A  bunch of  tools appeared. And I shook. The only reason I didn’t shake more was because the  Portuguese  leaned  my  back  against  his  chest  and  held  me  by  the shoulders, firmly but gently.
	‘It  won’t  hurt  much.  When  it’s  over,  I’ll  take  you  for  a  soda  and sweets. If you don’t cry, I’ll buy you some sweets that come with trading cards.’
	I  mustered  up  all  the  courage I  could.  The  tears streamed  down  my face  and  I  let  them  do  everything.  They  gave  me  stitches  and  even  ananti-tetanus  injection.  I  struggled  against  the  desire  to  throw  up.  The Portuguese held me tight as if he wanted to take on a little of my pain. He mopped my sweaty hair and face with his handkerchief. It felt like it was never going to end. But it did eventually.
	When he took me to the car, he was satisfied. He had done everything he’d promised. Except that now I didn’t want anything. It was as if my soul had been torn out through my feet.
	‘You can’t go to school now, squirt.’
	We were in the car and I was sitting very close to him, leaning against his arm, almost getting in the way of his driving.
	‘I’ll take  you somewhere  near  your house.  You make  something  up. You can say you got hurt at playtime and that the teacher sent you to the pharmacy.’
	I looked at him with appreciation.
	‘You’re a brave little man, squirt.’
	I  smiled  through  the  pain,  but inside  that  pain  I had  just  discovered something important. The Portuguese was now the person I liked most in the world.



Chapter Three
CONVERSATIONS, HERE AND THERE


‘Hey, Pinkie, I already know practically everything. Everything. He lives on Rua Barão de Capanema. Right at the end. He parks his car next to his house. He has two cages, one with a canary in it and another with a blue bird  in  it.  I  went  there  really  early  with  my  shoeshine  box,  acting  all casual.  I  wanted  to  go  so  badly,  Pinkie,  that  the  box  didn’t  even  feel heavy this time. I had a good look at the house and thought it was too big for  a  person  to  live  in  alone.  He  was  down  the  side,  at  the  washtub. Shaving.
	‘I clapped my hands.
	‘“Want your shoes shined, sir?”
	‘He  came  out  to  the  front  with  his  face  covered  in  soap,  one  bit already shaved. He smiled and said, “Oh, it’s you! Come in, squirt.”
	‘I followed him.
	‘“Just wait, I’ll be done in a minute.”
	‘And  he  scraped  his  face  with  the  razor:  kechah,  kechah,  kechah. When  I’m  all  grown  up,  I  thought,  I  want stubble  that  sounds  like  that when I shave: kechah, kechah, kechah …
	‘I sat on my box and waited. He looked at me in the mirror.
	‘“Aren’t you supposed to be in school?”
	‘“Today’s a public holiday, sir. That’s why I’m out shining shoes, to make a few tostões.”	
	‘“I see.”
	‘And  he  went  back  to  shaving.  Then  he  leaned  over  the  washtub, splashed  water  on  his  face  and  dried  it  with  a  towel.  His  face  looked flushed and shiny. He laughed again.
	‘“Want to have breakfast with me?”
	‘I said I didn’t, even though I did.
	‘“Come on in.”
	‘You  should  have  seen  how  clean  and  neat  it  was.  He  had  a  red chequered tablecloth and even proper coffee cups. Not tin cups like the ones  at  home.  He  said  an  old  black  woman  came  every  day  to  tidy  up when he went to work.
	‘“If you like, dunk your bread in the coffee like this. But don’t slur pwhen you take a sip. It’s bad manners.”’

I looked at Pinkie, but he was as quiet as a ragdoll.
	‘What?’
	‘Nothing. I’m listening.’
	‘Look, Pinkie, I don’t like arguments, but if you’re upset  you’d best say so now.’
	‘It’s just that all you do now is play Portuguese and I can’t join in.’ I  thought  about it.  Of  course.  It  hadn’t  even  occurred  to  me that  he couldn’t join in.
	‘In  a  couple  of  days  we’re  going  to  meet  Buck  Jones.  I  sent  him  a message through Chief  Sitting Bull. Buck Jones  is far away, hunting in the savannah … Pinkie, is it savannah or savannah? I’m not sure. Nexttime I go to Gran’s, I’ll ask Uncle Edmundo.’
	Silence again.
	‘Now where were we?’
	‘Dunking coffee in bread.’
	I laughed.
	‘You don’t dunk coffee in bread, silly.’

‘Anyway, me  and the  Portuguese were  both quiet  and he  just  looked atme, studying me.
	‘“So you managed to find out where I live.”
	‘I felt uncomfortable and decided to come clean.
	‘“Promise not to get mad if I tell you something, sir?”
	‘“Of course. There should be no secrets among friends.”
	‘“I haven’t shined any shoes today.”
	‘“I suspected that was the case.”
	‘“But  I  really wanted  to  …  Over  this  side  no  one needs  their  shoes dusted off. It’s only people who live near the highway.”
	‘“But  you  could  have  come  without  lugging  all  that  weight  around,no?”
	‘“If I didn’t lug all this weight around, I wouldn’t have been allowed out. I can’t wander off very far. Every now and then I have to show my face  at  home,  you  see?  To  go  further  away,  I  have  to  pretend  I’m working.”
	‘He laughed at my logic.
	‘“If I’m working, they know I’m not getting up to mischief. It’s better this way, because I don’t get beaten as much.”
	‘“I don’t believe you’re as naughty as you say you are.”
	‘Then I went really serious.
	‘“I’m worthless, really bad. That’s why it’s the devil that’s born in my heart on Christmas Day, not Baby Jesus, and I never get a single present. I’m a pest, sir. A nuisance. A dog. A lowlife. One of my sisters said that a wretch like me shouldn’t have been born.”
	‘He scratched his head in surprise.
	‘“Just this week I’ve had several beatings. Some of them hurt a lot. I also  get  beaten  for  things  I  didn’t  do.  I  get  blamed  for  everything. Everyone hits me.”
	‘“But what do you do that’s so bad?”
	‘“It  really  must  be  the  devil’s work.  I  get  this  itch  to  do  something, and then  I  do  it.  This week  I  set  fire  to Eugênia’s fence.  I  called  DonaCordélia a hippo and she got really mad. I kicked a ball of rags and the stupid  thing  went  through  Dona  Narcisa’s  window  and  broke  her  bigmirror. I broke three street lights with my slingshot. I hit Seu Abel’s son with a stone.”
	‘“Enough, enough.”
	‘He covered his mouth with his hand to hide his smile.
	‘“But there’s more. I pulled up all the seedlings that Dona Tentena had just planted. I made Dona Rosena’s cat swallow a marble.”
	‘“Oh! That’s no good. I don’t like to see animals mistreated.”
	‘“It  wasn’t  a  big  one.  It  was  really  tiny.  They  gave  the  critter  alaxative and it came out. Instead of giving me back my marble, they gave me a right thrashing. Or worse, one time I was asleep and Father took his sandal and whacked me. I didn’t even know why he was hitting me.”	
	‘“And why was it?”
	‘“A  whole  bunch  of  us  had  gone  to  the  cinema.  We’d  gone  on  a Monday ’cause it’s cheaper. And when we were there I needed to go, youknow?  So  I  stood  in  the  corner  by  the  wall  and  went.  And  it  went trickling down. It’s silly to leave and miss part of the film. But you know what boys are like, sir. If one does something then everyone else wants to do it, too. So they all took turns in the corner and the trickle turned into ariver. They ended up finding out and you know what they said: it was Seu Paulo’s boy. So they banned me from the Cinema Bangu for a year, until I learned how to behave. That night the owner told Father and he wasn’t impressed, believe me.”’

Pinkie was still pouting.
	‘Look, Pinkie, you don’t need to be like this. He’s my best friend. But you’re the absolute king of the trees, just like Luís is the absolute king of my brothers.  Our  hearts  need to  be  big  enough for  everything  we  love, you know.’
	Silence.
	‘Know what, Pinkie? I’m going to play marbles. You’re very grumpy lately.’

* * *

In the beginning it was only a secret because I was afraid to be seen in the car of the man who had walloped me. Afterwards I kept it up because it was nice to have a secret. And the Portuguese went along with it. We had  made  a pact  that  no  one  would  ever  find  out about our friendship. Firstly, because he didn’t want to give lifts to all the kids. When we saw people  we  knew,  or  even  Totoca,  I  would  slide  down  in  the  seat. Secondly, because we didn’t want anyone interrupting us, as we had lots to talk about.
	‘Have  you  ever  seen  my  mother,  sir?  She’s  an  Apinajé  Indian.  Her parents were real Indians. We’re all half Indians.’‘So how did you turn out so fair? With this almost white-blond hair, to boot?’
	‘It’s  the Portuguese  side  of the  family.  Mother looks  like an  Indian.She’s  really  dark  with  straight  hair.  Only  Glória  and  I  came  out  fair. Mother works on the looms at the English Mill to help pay the bills. The other  day  she  went  to  load  a  box  of  spools  and  suddenly  she  felt  this sharp  pain.  She  had  to  go  to  the  doctor.  He  gave  her  a  girdle  to  wear’ cause  of  a  hernia  in  her  back.  Mother’s  quite  nice  to  me.  When  she smacks  me,  she  gets  a  switch  of  arrowleaf  from  the  backyard  and  only hits me  on the legs.  She’s always so  tired when she  gets home  at night that she doesn’t even feel like talking.’
	The car cruised and I chattered.
	‘My oldest sister’s really something. She’s such a flirt. When Mother used to ask her to look after us and take us for a walk, she’d tell her not to go  up  to  the  top of  the  street  because  she knew  she  had  a  boyfriend waiting at the corner. So she’d head down to the bottom of the street and there’d  be  another  boyfriend  waiting  there.  You  couldn’t  leave  any pencils  around,  ’cause  she  was  always  writing  letters to  her  boyfriends…’
	‘Here we are.’
	We  were near  the market  and he  was pulling  over at  the place  we’d agreed on.
	‘See you tomorrow, squirt.’
	He knew I’d find a way to get him to stop off with me for a soda and a few trading cards. I’d already figured out the times when he didn’t have much to do. 
	It had been going on for more than a month. Much more. But I never knew  an  adult  could  look  as  sad  as  he  did  when  I  told  him  the  stories about  Christmas.  His  eyes  filled  with  tears  and  he  stroked  my  head, promising that I would never go without a Christmas present again.
	The  days  passed  slowly  and,  above  all,  happily.  People  were beginning to notice my transformation, even at home. I wasn’t getting up to  as  much  mischief  and  was  always  off  in  my  own  little  world  in  the backyard.  It’s  true  that  sometimes  the  devil  got  the  better  of me.  But  I didn’t swear as much as I used to and I left the neighbours in peace.
	Whenever  he  could,  the  Portuguese  would  invent  an  outing,  and  it was on one of these outings that he pulled the car over and smiled at me.
	‘Do you like riding in “our” car?’
	‘Is it mine too?’
	‘Everything that’s mine is yours. Like two really good friends.’
	I was ecstatic. If only I could tell everyone that I was half owner of the most beautiful car in the world.
	‘So, does this mean that now we’re completely friends?’ he asked.
	‘Yes.’
	‘Then can I ask you something?’
	‘Yes, sir.’
	‘You don’t want to grow up quickly so you can kill me any more, do you?’
	‘No. I’d never do that.’
	‘But you said it, didn’t you?’
	‘I  said it  when  I  was  angry.  I’m  never  going  to  kill  anyone  because when they kill chickens at home, I can’t even watch. Then I discovered that you’re not what they say you are. You’re not a cannibal or anything.’
	He almost jumped.
	‘What did you say?’
	‘Cannibal.’
	‘And do you know what that is?’
	‘Yes, I do, sir. Uncle Edmundo taught me. He’s a wise man. There’s aman in the city who invited him to make a dictionary. The only thing he’s never been able to explain to me is what a carborundum is.’
	‘You’re  changing  the  subject.  I  want  you  to  explain  to  me  what  a cannibal is, exactly.’
	‘Cannibals were Indians who ate human flesh. In the Brazilian history book  there’s  a  picture  of  one  skinning  some  Portuguese  because  he’s going  to  eat  them.  They  also  ate  warriors  from  enemy  tribes.  They’re different  from  African  cannibals,  who  like  to  eat  missionaries  with beards.’
	He gave a sort of belly laugh that I’d never heard from a Brazilian.
	‘You’re priceless, squirt. You make my jaw drop sometimes.’
	Then he gave me a serious look.
	‘Tell me, squirt, how old are you?’
	‘My pretend age or my real one?’
	‘Real, of course. I don’t want a friend who lies.’
	‘It’s  like  this:  I’m  really  five.  But  I  pretend  I’m  six,  otherwise  they won’t let me go to school.’
	‘And why did they put you in school so early?’
	‘Ha! Everyone  wanted me  out of  their hair  for a  few hours.  Do you know what carborundum is?’
	‘Where’d you get that from?’
	I  put  my  hand  in  my  pocket  and  felt  around  among  the  pebbles, slingshot, trading cards, spinning-top string and marbles.
	‘It’s this.’
	I  held  up  a  medallion  with  the  head  of  an  Indian  on  it.  A  NorthAmerican Indian, with feathers in his hair. The word was written on the back.
	He turned the medallion over in his hand.
	‘I’m afraid I don’t know either. Where did you find this?’
	‘It’s part of Father’s pocket watch. It had a strap with this on the end,which was supposed to hang out of his pocket. Father said the watch was going to be my inheritance. But then he needed money and had to sell it. Such  a  beautiful  watch.  He  gave  me  the  rest  of  the  inheritance,  which was this. I cut off the strap because it smelled funny.
	He stroked my hair again.
	‘You’re a complicated little chap, but I have to confess you’re filling this old heart with joy. Indeed you are. Shall we go now?’
	‘This  is  so  nice.  Just  a  little  more.  I  need  to  say  something  very serious, sir.’
	‘Go ahead.’
	‘So, we’re really friends, right?’
	‘Absolutely.’
	‘Even the car is half mine, isn’t it?’
	‘One day it will be yours, all of it.’
	‘It’s just that …’
	It was hard to get out.
	‘Go on … what’s the matter? You’re not one to get tongue-tied …’
	‘You won’t get angry?’
	‘Course not.’
	‘There are two things I don’t like about our friendship.’
	But it didn’t come out as easily as I had planned.
	‘What are they?’
	‘First, if we’re such good friends, then why should I have to call you “sir”, or “Seu Manuel” all the time?’
	He laughed.
	‘You can call me whatever you want.’
	‘It’s just that I don’t know what to call you when I talk to Pinkie about you. You’re not upset?’
	‘Why would I be? It’s a fair request. Who’s this Pinkie that I’ve never heard of?’
	‘Pinkie is Sweetie.’
	‘So, Sweetie is Pinkie and Pinkie is Sweetie. I’m still lost.’
	‘Pinkie is my little orange tree. And Sweetie is my nickname for him.’
	‘So, you have a little orange tree named Pinkie.’
	‘He’s  incredible.  He  talks  to  me,  turns  into  a  horse,  comes  on adventures  with  us.  With  Buck Jones,  Tom  Mix …  Fred  Thompson …Do  you  like  Ken  Maynard?’  (It  was  odd  leaving  off  the  ‘sir’,  but  I’d made up my mind.)
	He  made  a  gesture  as  if  to  say  he  didn’t  know  anything  about cowboys in westerns.
	‘The other day Fred Thompson introduced me to him. I really like the leather hat he wears. But I don’t think he knows how to laugh.’
	‘Well,  let’s  get  a  move  on,  because  the  world  in  that  little  head  of yours is confusing me. What’s the other thing?’
	‘The other thing’s even more difficult. But since I brought up the “sir” and  you  didn’t get  upset  …  I  don’t like  your  name  very  much.  It’s  not that I don’t like it, but among friends it’s a bit …’
	‘Goodness me, what now?’
	‘Do you really think I can call you Valadares?’
	He thought about it a little and smiled.
	‘No, it doesn’t sound right.’
	‘I  don’t  like  Manuel  either.  You’ve  no  idea  how  angry  I  get  when Father tells Portuguese jokes and says, “Manuel this, Manuel that”. You can tell that the son of a gun’s never had a Portuguese friend …’
	‘What did you just say?’
	‘That Father tells Portuguese jokes?’
	‘No. After that. Something rude.’
	‘Is “son of a gun” as bad as “son of a bitch”?’
	‘It’s almost the same.’
	‘Then I’ll try not to say it … So, what do you think?’
	‘You  tell  me.  Have  you  got  a  solution?  You  don’t  want  to  call  me Valadares, and by the sound of things, Manuel won’t do either.’
	‘There’s one name I love.’
	‘What?’
	I made the cheekiest face in the world.
	‘What Seu Ladislau and the others call you at the pastry shop.’
	He shook his fist, pretending to be angry.
	‘Why,  you’re  the  cockiest  person  I  know.  You  want  to  call  me “Portuga”, don’t you?’
	‘It’s a good name for a friend.’
	‘Is that all you want? Very well, then. Shall we go now?’ 
	He  started  the  engine and  drove  a distance,  thinking.  Then he  stuck his head out the window and looked up and down the street. No one was coming.
	He opened the car door and said, ‘Out.’
	I obeyed and followed  him to the back  of the car. He pointed at  thespare tyre.
	‘Now, hold on tight. And be careful.’
	I positioned myself for the piggyback, happy as could be. He climbed into the car and drove off slowly. He stopped after five minutes and came to check on me.
	‘Like it?’
	‘It’s like a dream.’
	‘Well, that’s enough. Let’s go, it’s getting late.’
	Night was gently falling and off in the distance crickets were singing in the hawthorn trees, announcing that there was more summer to come.
	The car purred along.
	‘Well. From now on, we’ll leave that subject well alone. OK?’
	‘Done.’
	‘I’d like to see you explaining where you’ve been all this time when you get home.’
	‘I’ve already got it worked out. I’m going to say I went to Catechism. Today’s Thursday, isn’t it?’
	‘You’re incorrigible. You’ve got an excuse for everything.’
	I scooted over close to him and leaned my head on his arm.
	‘Portuga!’
	‘What?’
	‘I never want to be far away from you, you know?’
	‘Why is that?’
	‘Because you’re the best person in the world. No one treats me badly when I’m with you and I feel a sun of happiness in my heart.’



Chapter Four
TWO MEMORABLE BEATINGS


‘You fold it here. Now, take the knife and cut the paper right on the fold.’
	The dull sound of the edge of the knife cutting the paper.
	‘Now glue it on, overlapping just a tiny bit, leaving this much margin. Like this.
	’I  was  sitting  next  to  Totoca,  learning  to  make  a  balloon.  After everything was glued down, Totoca pegged it on the clothes line by the crown.
	‘You only make the mouth when it’s all dry. Got it, dummy?’
	‘Yep.’
	We  sat  there  on  the  back  doorstep  staring  at  the  colourful  balloon, which  was  taking  a  long  time  to  dry.  Totoca,  as  self-appointed  expert, went on explaining, ‘You should only try to make a balloon with lots of sections  when  you’ve  really  got  the  hang  of  it.  In  the  beginning  you should just make them with two, ’cause it’s easier.’
	‘Totoca, if I make a balloon on my own, will you make the mouth for me?’
	‘That depends.’
	This  was  him  trying  to  cut  a  deal,  to  take  a  crack  at  my  marble  or trading  card  collections,  which  were  growing  faster  than  anyone  could understand.
	‘Gee, Totoca, I fight for you when you ask me to.’
	‘OK. I’ll do the first one for free, but if you don’t learn, the others’ll only be in exchange for something.’
	‘Fine.’
	I  swore  to  myself  that  I  was  going  to  learn  so  well  that  he’d  never touch my balloons again.
	After that I couldn’t get the balloon out of my head. It had to be ‘my’balloon.  Imagine  how  proud  Portuga  would  be  when  he  heard  of  my prowess. Pinkie’s admiration  when he  saw  the thing  swinging from  my hand …
	The idea  had  taken hold  of  me,  so  I  filled  my pockets  with  marbles and a few trading cards that I had repeats of and headed out. I would sell them on the cheap in order to buy at least two sheets of tissue paper.
	‘Attention, everyone! Five marbles for one tostão. Good as new!’
	Nothing happened.
	‘Ten  cards  for  one  tostão.  You  won’t  find  them  as  cheap  at  Dona Lota’s shop.’
	Nothing happened. None of the children had any money. I went all the way down Rua do Progresso peddling my wares. I visited Rua Barão deCapanema  almost  at  a  trot,  but  nothing  happened.  What  about  Gran’shouse? I went there too, but she wasn’t interested.
	‘I don’t want trading cards or marbles. You’re better off hanging on to them.  Because  tomorrow  you’ll  come  and  ask  me to  buy  them  for  you again.’
	Gran obviously didn’t have any money.
	I headed off again and looked down at my legs. They were dirty from so  much  walking  through  dusty  streets. I  looked  at the  sun,  which  was beginning to set. That was when the miracle happened.
	‘Zezé! Zezé!’
	Biriquinho came running like a mad man towards me.
	‘I’ve been looking everywhere for you. You selling?’
	I shook my pockets, jiggling the marbles.
	‘Let’s sit down.’
	We sat and I spread my wares on the ground.
	‘How much?’
	‘Five marbles for one tostão and ten cards for the same price.’
	‘That’s steep.’
	He  annoyed  me  with  that.  Bloody  thief!  How  was  it  ‘steep’  when everyone sold five cards and three marbles for what I was asking? I wentto put them all back in my pocket.
	‘Wait. Can I pick which ones?’
	‘How much you got?’
	‘Three tostões. I can spend two.’
	‘OK, then, I can give you six marbles and twelve cards.’

* * *

I raced into the Misery and Hunger. No one remembered that scene anymore.  Only  Seu  Orlando  was  there,  chatting  at  the  counter.  When  thefactory  siren  sounded,  everyone  came  to  wet  their  throats  and  you couldn’t even get inside.
	‘Have you got any tissue paper, sir?’
	‘You  got  money?  You’re  not  putting  anything  else  on  your  father’s tab.’
	I wasn’t offended. I just showed him the two tostões.
	‘I’ve only got pink and orange.’
	‘Is that all?’
	‘You  lot  made  off with  everything  I  had during  the  kite  season. But what difference does it make? Kites fly no matter what the colour, don’t they?’
	‘But it’s not for a kite. I’m going to make my first balloon. I want my first balloon to be the most beautiful one in the world.’
	There was no time to lose. It would take ages to get to Chico Franco’sgeneral store.
	‘I’ll take it.’

Now things were going to be different. I put a chair next to the table and helped King Luís up so he could watch.
	‘Now,  you  be  quiet,  alright?  Zezé  is  going  to  do  something  very tricky. When you grow up, I’ll teach you how to do it for free.’
	It was growing dark quickly, and there we were working. The factory siren  sounded.  I  needed  to  be  quick.  Jandira  was  already  putting  the plates  on  the  table.  She  liked  to  feed  us  first  so  we  didn’t  disturb  the grown-ups.
	‘Zezé! Luís!’
	She  bellowed  as  if  we  were  all  the  way  over  in  Murundu.  I  helped Luís down and said, ‘You go. I’ll be right behind you.’
	‘Zezé! Get a move on, or there’ll be trouble.’
	‘Coming!’
	The witch was in a bad mood. She must have had a fight with one ofher boyfriends. The one down at the bottom of the street or the one up at the top.
	Now, almost as if on purpose, the glue was drying and the flour was sticking to my fingers, making it hard to work.
	Her bellow was even louder. There was barely any light to work by.
	‘Zezé!’
	It was the last straw. Jandira was furious.
	‘You think I’m your servant? Come eat now!’
	She rushed into the living room, grabbed me by the ears, dragged meinto the kitchen and threw me against the table. That made me mad.
	‘I won’t eat. I won’t. I won’t. I want to finish my balloon.’
	I slipped away and raced back to where I’d been.
	She turned into a beast. Instead of coming at me, she went to the table and  that  was  the  end  of  my  balloon.  She  tore  it  to  shreds.  I  was  so shocked I did nothing. Then, not satisfied, she grabbed me by the arms and legs and threw me into the middle of the room.
	‘When I tell you to do something, you obey me.’
	The  devil  inside  me  worked  its  way  free.  My  indignation  exploded like a hurricane. The first blast was simple.
	‘Do you know what you are? You’re a whore!’
	She put her face close to mine, her eyes shooting sparks.
	‘Say that again if you’ve got the guts.’
	I dragged the word out.
	‘Whooore!’
	She snatched up the leather strap from the chest of drawers and began to flog me mercilessly. I turned my back to her and hid my head in my hands. My fury was greater than the pain.
	‘Whore! Whore! Bitch!’
	She didn’t stop. My body was burning up with pain. That was when Totoca came in and ran to help her, as she was beginning to tire.
	‘Go ahead and kill me, you murderer! You’ll get what you deserve in prison!’
	And she went on flogging me, hitting me so hard I fell to my knees, leaning on the chest of drawers.
	‘Whore! Bitch.’
	Totoca picked me up and turned me around.
	‘Cut it out, Zezé. You can’t talk to your sister like that.’
	‘She’s a whore. A murderer. A bitch!’
	Then  he  started  to  hit  me  in  the  face  –  the  eyes,  the  nose  and  the mouth. Especially the mouth.
	My salvation was that Glória heard. She was next door chatting with Dona  Rosena,  and  rushed  back  home  when  she  heard  all  the  shouting. She  blew  into  the  living  room  like  a  gale.  There  was  no  messing  with Glória and when she saw my face covered in blood, she pushed Totoca aside and shoved Jandira away too, not caring that she was the oldest. Iwas  sprawled  on  the  ground  almost  unable  to  open  my  eyes,  taking ragged breaths. She took me to the bedroom. I didn’t cry, but King Luíshad gone  to  hide  in  Mother’s room  and  was  bawling, terrified,  because they were hurting me.
	Glória was ranting.
	‘One day you’re going to kill this child and then what, you heartless monsters?’
	She had laid me down on the bed and was going to fetch the blessed bowl of salty water. Totoca came in awkwardly. Glória gave him a shove.
	‘Get lost, you coward!’
	‘Didn’t you hear what he was calling Jandira?’
	‘He  wasn’t  doing  anything.  You  two  provoked  him.  When  I  left  hewas  quietly  making  his  balloon.  You  have  no heart.  How can  you beat your brother so badly?’
	As she was wiping the blood off me, I spat a piece of tooth into thebowl. That stoked the volcano.
	‘Look what you’ve done, you lily liver. When you want to fight, youget scared and go running to him for help. Chicken! Nine years old andyou still wet the bed. I’m going to show everyone your mattress and thewet pyjamas you hide in the drawer every morning.’
	Then  she  sent  everyone  out  of  the  room  and  locked  the  door.  She turned on the light because night had fallen. She took off my shirt and sat there mopping the blood and gashes on my body.
	‘Does it hurt, shrimp?’
	‘It’s hurting a lot now.’
	‘I’ll  do  it  really  softly,  my  sweet  little  rascal.  You’ll  need  to  lie  on your stomach for a while so it can dry, otherwise your clothes’ll stick to the cuts and it’ll hurt.’
	But what really hurt  was my face. It  ached with pain  and  rage at so much unprovoked cruelty.
	When things were a little better, she lay down beside me, stroking my head.
	‘You  saw,  Gló.  I  wasn’t  doing  anything.  When  I  deserve  it,  I  don’t mind being flogged. But I wasn’t doing anything.’
	She gulped.
	‘But the saddest part was my balloon. It was looking so beautiful. Justask Luís.’
	‘I believe you. It was beautiful. But don’t worry. Tomorrow we’ll goto Gran’s house and buy some tissue paper. And I’ll help you make the most beautiful balloon in the world. So beautiful that even the stars will be jealous.’
	‘There’s  no  point,  Gló.  You  only  make  one  beautiful  first  balloon. When that one doesn’t work out, you never get it right again or you never feel like making it again.’
	‘One  day  …  one  day  …  I’m  going  to  take  you  far  away  from  this house. We’re going to live …’
	She stopped short. She must have been thinking about Gran’s house, but it would be the same hell there. That was when she decided to enter the world of the orange tree and my dreams.
	‘I’m going to take you to live on Tom Mix’s or Buck Jones’s ranch.’
	‘But I like Fred Thompson even better.’
	‘Then let’s go there.’
	And, completely helpless, we began to weep quietly together …

* * *

Even  though  I  missed  Portuga,  I  didn’t  go  to  see  him  for  two  days.  Iwasn’t  even  allowed  to go  to  school. They  didn’t  want  there to  be any witnesses  to  such  brutality.  As  soon  as  the  swelling  on  my  face  went down and my lips healed, I would go back to my normal routine. I spentthe  days  sitting  next  to  Pinkie  with  my  little  brother,  with  no  desire  to talk. Afraid of everything. Father had sworn that he’d beat me to a pulp if I ever repeated what I’d said to Jandira again. Now I was even afraid to breathe. Best to take refuge in the tiny shadow of my orange tree, look through  the  mountains  of  trading  cards  that  Portuga  had  given  me  and patiently teach King Luís to play marbles. He was a bit clumsy, but he’d eventually get the hang of it.
	I missed Portuga a lot. He must have thought it odd that I hadn’t been to see  him  and  if  he’d  known  where I  lived,  he  might  even  have  come looking for  me.  My  ears  sorely  missed his  thick  Portuguese  accent  and the way he always called me tu. Dona Cecília Paim had told me that you really  need  to  know  your  grammar  to  address  others  as  tu.  My  eyes longed to see his brown face, his impeccable clothes in dark colours, the collars  of  his  shirts,  always so  stiff,  as  if  they’d  come  straight out  of  adrawer, his chequered waistcoat and even his gold anchor cuff-links.
	But I’d be better soon. Children heal quickly, or so they say.
	That night Father hadn’t gone out. No one else was home, except forLuís,  who  was  already  asleep.  Mother  was  probably  on  her  way  home from  the  city.  Sometimes  she  did  overtime  at  the  English  Mill  and  weonly saw her on Sundays.
	I had decided to stay near Father, because that way I couldn’t get up to any mischief. He was sitting in the rocking chair staring blankly at the wall.  His  face  was  always  covered  in  stubble.  His  shirt  wasn’t  always terribly  clean.  Maybe  he  hadn’t  gone  to  play  cards  with  his  friends because he had no money. Poor Father, it must have made him sad that Mother had to work  to help pay the  bills. Lalá already had  a job at the factory. It must have been hard to go looking for jobs and always come home  downcast  after  hearing  the  same  reply:  ‘We  need  someone younger.’
	Sitting on the doorstep, I was counting little white geckos on the wall and glancing  at  Father from  time  to time.  The  only  other time  I’d  seen him  looking  so  sad  was  that  Christmas  morning.  I  needed  to  do something for him. Maybe I could sing for him. I could sing very softly and for sure it would cheer him up a little. I went through my repertoire in my head and remembered the last song Seu Ariovaldo had taught me.	‘The  Tango’;  the  tango  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  things  I’d  ever heard. I started softly:

	I want a naked woman tonight
	Very naked I want her to be …
	I want her in the full-moon light
	I want her body all to me … 

	‘Zezé!’
	‘Yes, Father?’
	I stood up quickly. Father must have liked it a lot and wanted me tosing it closer to him.
	‘What’s that you’re singing?’
	I repeated it.

	I want a naked woman tonight …

	‘Who taught you that song?’
	His eyes had taken on a dull shine as if he was about to go crazy.
	‘Seu Ariovaldo.’
	‘I already told you I don’t want you anywhere near him.’
	He hadn’t said any such thing. I don’t even think he knew I worked as a singer’s helper.
	‘Sing it again.’
	‘It’s a popular tango.’

	I want a naked woman tonight …
	
	A slap exploded on my face.
	‘Sing it again.’

	I want a naked woman tonight …

	Another  slap,  another  and  another.  Tears  sprang  unexpectedly  frommy eyes.
	‘Go on, keep singing.’
	
	I want a naked woman tonight …

	I  could  barely  move  my  face;  it  was  buffeted  from  side  to  side.  Iwould  open my  eyes  and  they  would  shut  again  with  the  impact  of  the blows. I didn’t know if I was supposed to stop or if I had to obey him …but  within  my  pain  I  had  decided  something.  That  was  to  be  my  last beating, even if it meant if I had to die.
	When he stopped for a moment and ordered me to sing again, I didn’t.I  looked  at  him  with  contempt  and  said: ‘Murderer!  Go  ahead  and  kill me. You’ll get what you deserve in prison!’
	Only  then  did  he  get  up  from  the  chair,  seething  with  anger.  He unbuckled  his  belt,  which had  two  metal rings,  and began  to  reel off  a string  of  insults.  He  called  me  a  dog,  a  waste  of  space,  a  good-for-nothing, if that was how I spoke to my father.
	He  cracked  the  belt  at  my  body  like  a  whip.  It  felt  like  it  had  at housand fingers that could hit me all over. I fell to the floor and curled up  in  a  corner  by  the  wall.  I  was  sure  he  was  going  to  kill  me.  I  was conscious when Glória came to my rescue. Glória, the only sandy-haire done like me. Glória, whom no one touched. She grabbed Father’s hand to stop the blow.
	‘Father.  Father.  Hit  me,  for  God’s  sake,  but  don’t  hit  that  child  anymore.’
	He threw the belt on the table and ran his hands over his face. He was crying for himself and for me.
	‘I lost my head. I thought he was taunting me. Giving me cheek.’
	When Glória picked me up off the ground, I blacked out.
	When I came to my senses, I was burning up with fever. Mother and Glória  were  at  my  bedside  saying  sweets  things.  Lots  of  people  were moving  about  in  the  living  room.  Even  Gran  had  been  called.  Every movement hurt me all over. Later I learned that they had wanted to callthe doctor, but it wouldn’t have looked good.
	Glória brought me some broth she’d made and tried to feed me a few spoonfuls. I could barely breathe, much less swallow. All I wanted to dowas  sleep  and  each  time  I  woke  up,  the  pain  had  eased  a  little.  But Mother and Glória  continued to watch over  me. Mother spent  the night with  me  and  didn’t  get  up  until  just  before  first  light  to  get  ready  forwork. When she came to say goodbye, I clung to her neck.
	‘It’ll be fine, son. You’ll be all good tomorrow.’
	‘Mother …’
	Quietly I murmured what was, perhaps, the greatest accusation of mylife.
	‘Mother,  I  shouldn’t  have  been  born.  I  should  have  been  like  myballoon …’
	She sadly stroked my hair.
	‘Everyone should have been born just as they were. You too. It’s just that sometimes, Zezé, you’re too naughty.’



Chapter Five
A STRANGE, BUT GENTLE, REQUEST


It took me a week to recover completely. My sadness didn’t come fromthe pain or the blows. At home everyone had started to treat me so well that it was a bit weird. But something was missing. Something important that could make me go back to being myself, perhaps believe in people, believe that they were kind. I was so quiet, so apathetic, almost always sitting beside Pinkie, blankly  watching the world  go by. I  didn’t talk to Pinkie or listen to his stories. At the most I’d let my little brother sit with me. I’d play Sugarloaf Mountain with him, which he loved, and let himp ush  the  hundred  little  cable  car  buttons  up  and  down,  all  day  long.  I watched him with great tenderness, because when I was a child, like him,I liked that too.
	Glória  was  worried  about  my  silence.  She  would  set  my  pile  of trading  cards  and  bag  of  marbles  nearby  and  sometimes  I  didn’t  even move. I didn’t feel like going to the cinema or shining shoes. Truth was, Icouldn’t get over the pain inside me. The pain of a tiny animal that has been brutally beaten and doesn’t know why.
	Glória asked about my imaginary friends.
	‘They’re not here. They’ve gone far away.’
	I meant Fred Thompson and my other friends.
	But she  didn’t know  the  revolution  that was  taking  place  inside  me.
What  I  had  decided.  I  was  going  to  change  films.  I  was  done  with cowboys  and  Indians  and  all  that.  From  now  on  I  only  wanted  to  seeromantic films, with lots of kissing and hugging, in which everyone liked each other. Since all I was good for was getting beaten up, at least I coulds ee other people liking each other.
	The day came when I could go to school. I went, but not to school. I knew  Portuga  would  have  been  waiting  for  me  in ‘our’ car  for a  week and had probably given up. Naturally, he would only start waiting again when I told him to. My absence must have worried him a lot. But even if he’d known I was sick, he wouldn’t have come looking for me. We had given our word; we’d  made a  secret pact.  No one  but God  could know about our friendship.
	His beautiful car was parked in front of the pastry shop, opposite the train  station.  The  first  ray  of  joy  broke  through.  My  heart  galloped  on ahead, spurred on by my eagerness to see him. I was going to see my one true friend. 
	But  at  that  moment  a  beautiful  whistle  echoed  through  the  station, giving me goose bumps. It was the Mangaratiba. Violent, proud, master of the tracks. It flew past, its carriages jiggling in all their splendour. The people  at  the  windows  were  looking  out.  Everyone  who  travelled  was happy.  When  I  was  a  child,  I  liked  to  watch  the  Mangaratiba  go  past while I waved and waved.
	I would wave until the train disappeared into the horizon. Now it was Luís who was going through this phase.
	I looked around the pastry shop and there he was. At the last table sohe could see everyone  who came in,  but he was looking  the other way. He  didn’t  have  a  jacket  on  and  was  wearing  his  beautiful  chequered waistcoat, which showed the white sleeves of his clean shirt.
	I  suddenly  felt  so  weak  I  could  barely  make  it  over  to  him.  SeuLadislau tipped him off.
	‘Look who’s here, Portuga.’
	He  slowly  turned  and  his  face  spread  into  a  smile  of  happiness.  He flung his arms open and gave me a long hug.
	‘My heart was telling me you’d come today.’
	Then he gave me a long look.
	‘So, where’ve you been all this time?’
	‘I was very sick.’
	He pulled out a chair.
	‘Have a seat.’
	He snapped his fingers to call over the waiter, who already knew what I liked. But when he set down the soda and pastry in front of me, I didn’t even  touch  them.  I  rested  my  head  in  my  arms  and  stayed  like  that, feeling frail and sad.
	‘Don’t you want it?’
	And  because  I  didn’t  reply, Portuga lifted up my face.  I  bit my  lips hard and my eyes filled with tears.
	‘What’s all this about, squirt? Tell your old pal here.’
	‘I can’t. Not here.’
	Seu  Ladislau  was  shaking  his  head  as  if  he  didn’t  understand.  I decided to say something.
	‘Portuga, is the car still “our” car?’
	‘Yes. Do you still doubt it?’
	‘Could you take me for a drive?’
	The request surprised him.
	‘Sure, if you want to.’
	He saw that my eyes were even more full of tears, so he took me by the arm, led me to the car and lifted me into the passenger seat.
	He went back to pay the bill and I heard him talking to Seu Ladislau and the others.
	‘No one in that boy’s family understands him. I’ve never seen such a sensitive child.’
	‘Tell the truth, Portuga. You really like the little rascal.’
	‘More  than  you  can  imagine.  He’s  a  wonderful,  intelligent  little squirt.’
	He came back to the car and sat down.
	‘Where do you want to go?’
	‘I just want to get out of here. We can go to the road to Murundu. It’snearby and won’t use up a lot of petrol.’
	He laughed.
	‘Aren’t you too young to understand grown-up problems?’
	We  were  so  poor  that  from  an  early  age  we’d  learned  not  to  waste money. Everything cost a lot. Petrol was expensive.
	During  the  short  drive  he  said  nothing.  He  allowed  me  to  collectmyself. But when we left everything behind and the landscape became a beautiful blanket of green fields, he stopped the car, looked and me and smiled, with his kindness that made up for the lack of kindness in the rest of the world.
	‘Portuga,  look  at  my  face.  No,  not  face,  snout.  People  at  home  say I’ve  got  a  snout  because  I’m  not  a  person,  but  an  animal,  an  ApinajéIndian, the devil’s child.’
	‘I still prefer to look at your face.’
	‘Well,  take  a  good  look.  See  how  it’s  still  all  swollen  from  being beaten?’
	Portuga’s eyes filled with dismay and pity.
	‘But why did they do that?’
	I  told  him,  everything,  without  exaggerating  a  single detail.  When I finished, his eyes were moist and for a while he was at a loss for words.
	‘But it’s not right to beat such a young child like that. You’re not even six years old. Goodness gracious me!’
	‘I know why. I’m worthless. I’m so bad that when  Christmas  comes the same thing always happens: the devil child is born in my heart instead of the Baby Jesus!’
	‘Nonsense, you’re still a little angel. You might be a little mischievous…’
	The idea came back to play on my mind.
	‘I’m  so  bad,  I  shouldn’t  have  been  born.  I  said  that  to  Mother  the other day.’
	For the first time he stammered.
	‘You shouldn’t have said that.’
	‘I asked to speak to you because it’s really important. I know it’s badthat Father can’t get a job at his  age.  I know it must  hurt a lot. Mother having to leave for work before dawn to help pay the bills. She works the looms  at the  English  Mill.  She  wears  a  girdle  because  she  got  a hernia loading a box of spools. Lalá’s all grown up and even though she studied a lot she has to work at the factory … It’s all horrible. But he didn’t have to beat me so much. At Christmas, I promised that he could beat me as much as he liked, but this time it was too much.’
	He was staring at me in disbelief.
	‘Goodness  me!  How  can  such  a  young  child  understand  and  worry about grown-up problems like that. I’ve never seen anything like it!’
	He gulped back a little of his emotion.
	‘We’re friends, aren’t we? Well, let’s talk man to man. Though, to be honest, sometimes it gives me goosebumps to talk about certain things with you. Firstly, I don’t think you should swear at your sister like that.In fact, you should never swear, you know?’
	‘But I’m little. It’s the only way I can get my own back.’
	‘Do you know what those words mean?’
	I nodded.
	‘Then you can’t and you shouldn’t.’
	We paused.
	‘Portuga!’
	‘What?’
	‘Don’t you like me saying swear words?’
	‘No, I don’t.’
	‘OK then, if I don’t die, I promise I won’t swear any more.’
	‘Good. And what’s this about dying?’
	‘I’ll tell you when we get there.’
	We were silent again. The Portuguese was brooding.
	‘Since you trust me, squirt, I need to know something else. That song, the tango. Did you know what you were singing?’
	‘I  won’t lie  to  you. I  wasn’t  really  sure.  I  learned  it because  I  learn everything. Because it’s such a pretty song. I wasn’t thinking about what it meant. But he beat me so much, Portuga. But it’s OK,’ I sniffled. ‘I’m going to kill him.’
	‘What’s this, child? You’re going to kill your father?’
	‘Yep.  I’ve  already  started.  Killing  him  doesn’t  mean  grabbing  BuckJones’s  revolver and  bang! That’s  not  it. You  can  kill someone  in your heart. Stop loving them. And one day they die.’
	‘What an imagination you have,’ he said, unable to hide the emotion that  had  taken  hold  of  him. ‘But  didn’t you  say  you  were  going  to  kill me, too?’ he went on.
	‘That was in the beginning. But then I killed you back to front. I made you die and then you came to life in my heart. You’re the only person I like,  Portuga.  The  only  friend  I  have.  It’s  not  because  you  give  metrading cards, sodas, sweets and marbles … I swear it’s true.’
	‘But everyone  loves you.  Your mother,  even  your father. Your  sister Glória,  King  Luís  …  And  have  you  forgotten  your  little  orange  tree? Pinkie … What is it you call him?’
	‘Sweetie.’
	‘So …’
	‘It’s  different  now,  Portuga.  Truth  is,  Sweetie  is  just  a  simple  little orange  tree  that  doesn’t  even flower  … But  not  you.  You’re  my  friend and that’s why I asked to go for a ride in our car, which is soon going tobe just yours. I came to say goodbye.’
	‘Goodbye?’
	‘Yes.  You  see,  I’m  good-for-nothing,  I’m  tired  of  getting  beaten  upand having my ears pulled. I’m not going to be another mouth …’
	I started to feel a painful knot in my throat. I needed courage to say the rest.
	‘Are you going to run away?’
	‘No. I spent  the whole week thinking  about it. Tonight I’m  going to throw myself under the Mangaratiba.’
	He  didn’t  say  a  word,  just  hugged  me  tightly  and  comforted  me  as only he knew how.
	‘No.  Don’t  say  that,  for  the  love  of  God.  You  have  a  beautiful  life ahead of you. With your mind and your intelligence. It’s a sin to say such a thing! I don’t want you to think it or say it ever again. What about me? Don’t you like me? If you do, and you’re not lying, then you shouldn’t say things like that. He pulled back from me and looked me in the eye. He wiped away my tears with the back of his hand.
	‘I’m very fond of you, squirt. Much more than you think. C’mon, give me a smile.’I smiled, somewhat relieved by his confession.
	‘Soon  this  will  all  be  forgotten.  You’ll  be  master  of the  streets  withyour kites, king of the marbles, a cowboy as strong as Buck Jones … By the way, I had an idea. Want to know what it is?’
	‘Yes.’
	‘On Saturday, I’m not going to see my daughter in Encantado. She’s gone  to  spend  a  few  days  in  Paquetá  with  her  husband.  Since  the weather’s  been  fine,  I  was  thinking  about  going  fishing  over  in  the Guandu River. I don’t have a fishing pal and wondered if you’d like tocome.’
	My eyes lit up.
	‘Would you take me?’
	‘Well, if you want. You don’t have to come.’
	My reply was to fling my arms around his neck and hug him, leaning my face against his shaved face. We were laughing and the tragedy had begun to fade.
	‘I know a beautiful spot. We can take something to eat. What do you like best?’
	‘You, Portuga.’
	‘I’m talking about salami, eggs, bananas …’
	‘I like everything. At home we learn to like anything and everything.’
	‘Shall we go, then?’
	‘I won’t be able to sleep thinking about it.’
	But there was a serious problem casting a shadow over our happiness.
	‘And what will you say about being out of the house the whole day?’
	‘I’ll make something up.’
	‘What if you get caught?’
	‘No  one  is  allowed  to  beat  me  until  the  end  of  the  month.  They promised Glória, and no one messes with Glória. She’s the only sandy-haired one like me.’
	‘Really?’
	‘Really. They can only hit me after one month, when I’ve recovered.’
	He started the engine and began to drive back.
	‘So, do you promise not to talk about it again?’
	‘About what?’
	‘The Mangaratiba?’
	‘It’ll take me a while to get around to it …’
	‘Good to hear.’
	I  later  heard,  from  Seu  Ladislau,  that  despite  my  promise,  Portuga didn’t  go  home  until  very  late  that  night,  after  the  Mangaratiba  had passed.

* * *

The  drive  was  beautiful.  The  road  wasn’t  wide  or  as phalted,  or  even paved, but the trees and fields were dazzling. Not to mention the sun and the cheerful bright blue sky. Gran had once said that happiness is a ‘sunshining in your heart’. And that the sun lit up everything with happiness. If it was true, the sun in my heart made everything beautiful.
	We  talked  about  certain  things  again,  as  the  car  purred  along unhurriedly.  It  seemed  like  even  the  car  wanted  to  listen  to  our conversation.
	‘So, when you’re with me, you’re calm and well behaved. And with your teacher – what’s her name again?’
	‘Dona Cecília Paim. Did you know she has a little white spot in one of her eyes?’
	He laughed.
	‘You  said  Dona  Cecília  Paim  wouldn’t  believe  the  things  you  do outside school. You’re good with your little brother and Glória. So why do you think you change so much?’
	‘I don’t know. All I know is that everything I do leads to trouble. The whole  street  knows  what  I’ve  been  up  to.  It’s  as  if  the  devil  whisper sthings  in  my  ear.  Otherwise  I  wouldn’t  get  up  to  so  much  monkey business, as my Uncle Edmundo calls it. Do you know what I did once to Uncle Edmundo? I didn’t tell you, did I?’
	‘No.’
	‘Well,  it was  a  good  six  months  ago. He’d  got  a  hammock  from  upnorth and was really pleased with it. He wouldn’t even let us swing in it,the son of a bitch …’
	‘What did you say?’
	‘Um, the miserable wretch. When he was done with his nap, he’d rollit up and carry it under his arm. As if we were going to steal a piece of it. Well, one day I went to Gran’s house and she didn’t see me come in. She must have had her glasses on the end of her nose, reading the classifieds. I went outside. I looked at the guava trees but I didn’t see anything. Then I  saw  Uncle  Edmundo  in  the  hammock,  which  he’d  hung  between  the fence  and  the  trunk  of  an  orange  tree.  He  was  snoring  like  a  pig,  his mouth kind of loose and open. His newspaper had fallen on the ground. Then the devil spoke to me and I saw that there was a box of matches in his pocket. I tore off a bit of paper without making any noise. I piled up the others bits of newspaper and set fire to the wick I’d made. When the flames appeared right beneath his …’
	I paused and asked earnestly, ‘Portuga, can I say “bum”?’
	‘Well, it’s a bit rude and you should try to avoid it.’
	‘So what should we say instead of bum?’
	‘Posterior.’‘What? That’s a new one.’
	‘Posterior. POS-TER-I-OR.’
	‘Well,  when  it  started to  burn  under  his bum’s posterior, I  raced  out the  gate  and  watched  through  a  hole  in  the  fence  to  see  what  would happen.  He  bellowed.  He  jumped  up  and  grabbed  his  hammock.  Then Gran came  running and  gave him  a right  scolding. “I’m  tired of  telling you  not  to  smoke  in  the  hammock!”  And  when  she  saw  the  burning newspaper she grumbled that she hadn’t read that one yet.’
	The Portuguese chuckled heartily and I liked seeing him cheerful like that.
	‘Didn’t they catch you?’
	‘They never found out. I only told Sweetie. If they caught me they’d have cut my balls off.’
	‘Cut what?’
	‘I mean, I’d have been in trouble.’
	He chuckled again and we looked out at the road. Yellow dust rose up everywhere that the car went. But I was mulling something over.
	‘Portuga, you weren’t lying, were you?’‘About what, squirt?’
	‘Well, I’ve never heard anyone say: “He was kicked in the posterior.”Have you?’
	He laughed again.
	‘You’re  really  something.  I’ve  never  heard  it  either.  But  OK,  forget “posterior” and say “behind” instead. But let’s change the subject or soon I won’t know what to say to you. Watch the landscape. You’re going tosee more and more big trees. We’re getting closer to the river.’
	He turned right and took a shortcut. The car went on and on and then stopped  right  in  an  empty  field.  There  was  just  one  big  tree  with enormous roots.
	I clapped my hands with glee.
	‘How  beautiful!  What  a  beautiful  place!  The  next  time  I  see  BuckJones,  I’m  going  to  tell  him  that  his  prairies  and  plains  don’t  hold  a candle to our place.’
	He stroked my head.
	‘This is how I want to see you always. Living out good dreams, not with a head full of crazy ideas.’
	We got out of the car and I helped carry the things into the shade of the tree.
	‘Do you always come here alone, Portuga?’
	‘Most of the time. See? I have a tree too.’
	‘What’s it called, Portuga? If you have a tree this big you have to give it a name.’
	He thought for a minute, smiled and thought some more.
	‘It’s a secret, but I’ll tell you. Her name is Queen Carlota.’
	‘And does she talk to you?’
	‘Not  exactly. Because  a  queen  never  speaks  directly to  her  subjects. But I always call her “Your Majesty”.’
	‘What are subjects?’
	‘They’re the people who do what the queen says.’
	‘Am I your subject?’
	He get out such a hearty laugh that it made the grasses stir.
	‘No, because I’m not a king and I don’t give orders. I will always ask you to do things.’
	‘But you could be a king. You have everything to be a king. All kings are  fat  like  you.  The  King  of  Hearts,  the  King  of  Spades,  the  King  of Clubs  and  the  King  of  Diamonds.  All  of  the  kings  in  the  deck  are handsome like you too, Portuga.’
	‘C’mon.  Let’s  get  a  move  on,  because  all  this chatter  isn’t  going  tocatch us any fish.’
	He  got  a  fishing  rod  and  a  tin  can  full  of  worms,  and  took  off  his shoes  and  waistcoat.  Without  the  waistcoat  he  looked  even  fatter.  He pointed at the river.
	‘You  can play  there. It’s shallow.  But not  on the  other side,  becauseit’s very deep. Now I’m going over there to fish. If you want to stay with me, you can’t talk. Otherwise the fish will swim away.’
	I  left  him  sitting  there  and  went  to  play.  To  discover  things.  How beautiful that piece of river was. I wet my feet and saw a whole bunch of frogs darting here and there in the current. I watched sand, pebbles and leaves being pulled along by the current. I thought of Glória.

	Said the flower to the river
	‘Leave me, leave me be!
	I was born up on the hill …
	I will die down in the sea.’

	But the river, quick and cold,
	With its mocking song,
	Raced over sand and stone,
	And swept the flower along.
	
	‘Rocking in my cradle,
	Rocking in my treetop;
	From the sky so blue
	Falls the clearest dewdrop!’

	Glória was right. The poem was the most beautiful thing in the world. It  was  a  shame  I  couldn’t  tell  her  I’d  seen  the  poem  come  to  life.  Not with a flower, but with a bunch of little leaves that had fallen from trees and been carried away to the sea. I wondered if the river, this river, also went  to  the  sea.  I  could  ask  the  Portuguese.  No,  it  would  disturb  his fishing.
	But he only caught two little fish, which I felt a bit sorry for.
	The  sun  was  high  in  the  sky.  My  face  was  flushed  from  so  much playing and chattering with the world. That was when Portuga came and called me. I skipped over to him like a kid goat.
	‘Why, you’re covered in dirt, squirt.’
	‘I’ve been playing a lot. I lay on the ground. I splashed in the water…’
	‘Let’s  eat.  But  you  can’t  eat  covered  in  filth  like  that.  Take  your clothes off and go have a wash in that shallow spot over there.’
	I hesitated, unsure whether to obey or not.
	‘I don’t know how to swim.’
	‘But you don’t have to. Go ahead, I’ll stay nearby.’
	I stayed  where I was.  I didn’t want him  to see  the marks,  welts and scars from my beatings.
	‘Don’t tell me you’re ashamed to undress in front of me.’
	‘No. It’s not that.’
	I  had  no  choice.  I  turned  around  and  began  to  take  off  my  clothes.
First my shirt, then my trousers with the cloth brace.
	I threw them all on the ground and turned to face him, pleading. He said nothing, but his eyes reflected his indignation and horror.
	He just mumbled, ‘If it hurts, don’t get in the water.’
	‘It doesn’t hurt any more.’

* * *

We  ate  eggs,  bananas,  salami,  bread  and  candied  guava,  which  only  Il iked.  We  went  to  drink  water  from  the  river  and  then  returned  to  the shade of Queen Carlota.
	He was about to sit down, but I made a sign for him to stop. I placed a hand on my chest and addressed the tree.
	‘Your  Majesty,  your  subject,  Sir  Manuel  Valadares,  and  the  greatest warrior of the Apinajé Nation … We are going to sit at Your Majesty’s feet.’
	We laughed and sat.
	The  Portuguese  lay  down  on  the  ground,  covered  a  root  of  the  tree with his waistcoat and said, ‘Now it’s time for a nap.’
	‘But I’m not tired.’
	‘It doesn’t matter. I can’t let you run loose, mischievous thing that youare.’
	He placed his hand on my chest and trapped me. We lay there a long while,  watching  the  clouds  slip  through  the  branches  of  the  tree.  The moment had arrived. If I didn’t say it now, I never would.
	‘Portuga!’
	‘Yes?’
	‘Are you asleep?’
	‘Not yet.’
	‘Is it true what you said to Seu Ladislau at the pastry shop?’
	‘I’ve said a lot of things to Seu Ladislau at the pastry shop.’
	‘About me. I heard you. I heard you from the car.’
	‘And what did you hear?’
	‘That you really like me?’	
	‘Of course I like you. Why do you ask?’
	I turned over, without freeing myself from his arms. I stared into his half-closed  eyes.  His  face  looked  even  fatter  like  that  and  even  more kingly.
	‘No, but I want to know if you like me lots and lots?	
	’‘Of course, silly.’
	And he hugged me tighter as proof of what he said.
	‘I’ve been doing some serious thinking. You only have that daughter in Encantado, don’t you?
	’‘Yes.’
	‘You live alone in that house with your two bird cages, don’t you?’
	‘Yes.’
	‘You said you have no grandchildren, right?’
	‘Yes.’
	‘And you like me, don’t you?’
	‘Yes.’
	‘Then  why  don’t  you  go  to  my  place  and  ask  Father  to  give  me  to you?’
	He was so moved that he sat up and held my face with both hands.
	‘Would you like to be my son?’
	‘We don’t get to choose our father before we’re born. But if I could, I’d choose you.’
	‘Really, squirt?’
	‘I  could  even  swear  it.  I’d  be  one  less  mouth  for  them  to  feed.  I promise  I’ll  never  say  swear  words  again,  not  even  “bum”.  I’ll  polish your shoes, look after the birds in the cage. I’ll be really well behaved. There won’t be a better pupil in the school. I’ll be very good.’
	He didn’t even know what to say.
	‘Everyone will be so happy if I’m given away. It’ll be a relief. I have a sister between Glória and Totoca who was given away to a family in the north.  She  went  to  live  with  a  rich  cousin  to  study  and  have  a  proper upbringing.’
	The silence continued and his eyes were full of tears.
	‘If they don’t want to give me away, you can buy me. Father doesn’t have a penny. I’m sure he’ll sell me. If he charges a lot, you can buy me in instalments, just like people pay Jacob the money lender …’
	Because he didn’t answer, I resumed my old position and so did he.	
	‘You know, Portuga, if you don’t want me, it’s OK. I didn’t mean tomake you cry …’
	He stroked my hair for a long time.
	‘That’s not it, son. That’s not it. We can’t solve our problems just like that, with a snap of the fingers. But I have a suggestion. Much as I’d like to, I can’t take you away from your parents or your home. It isn’t right. But  from  now  on,  even  though  I  already  thought  of  you  as  a  son,  I’m going to treat you as if you really were my own.
	I sat up, elated.
	‘Really, Portuga?’
	‘I could even swear it, as you always say.’
	I did something that I rarely did or wanted to do with the members of my family. I kissed him on his fat, kind face.



Chapter Six
LITTLE BY LITTLE, TENDERNESS IS BORN


‘“None  of  them  could  speak,  and  you  couldn’t  go  horseback  riding  on them either, Portuga?”
	‘“None of them.”
	‘“But you weren’t a child, then?”
	‘“I was. But not all children are lucky enough to understand trees like you do. And it isn’t every tree that likes to talk.”
	‘He gave an affectionate laugh and went on.
	‘“They weren’t exactly trees, but trellised vines, and before you ask: trellised vines are what grapes grow on. They’re just thick vines. It was pretty to see the harvests and the grape-stomping.”
	‘He explained what that was. He seemed to know a lot. As much as Uncle Edmundo.
	‘“Tell me more.”
	‘“You’re enjoying it?”
	‘“Very much. I wish I could talk with you non-stop for 852 miles.”
	‘“What about the petrol for all that?”
	‘“It’s make-believe petrol.”
	‘Then  he  told  me  about  the  grass  that  turns  into  hay  in  winter  and about cheese-making. He says ‘cheese’ differently to us. He changes the music of the words a lot, but I think they sound even more musical.
	‘He stopped talking and gave a long sigh.
	‘“I’d  like  to  go  back  there  very  soon.  Perhaps  to  spend  my  twilight years  in  a  peaceful,  enchanted  place.  Folhadela,  near  Monreal,  in  my beautiful Trás-os-Montes.”
	‘It  was  only  then  that  I  really  noticed  that  Portuga  was  older  than Father, although his plump face was always shiny, with fewer wrinkles . A strange feeling ran through me.
	‘“Are you serious?”
	‘Only then did he notice my disappointment.
	‘“Don’t worry, silly, it’s a long way off. It might never even happen.”
	‘“What about me? It took so long for you to be like this, the way I like you.”
	‘My eyes filled with cowardly tears.
	‘“But surely I’m allowed to dream too.”
	‘“It’s just that you didn’t put me in your dream.”
	‘He smiled dotingly.
	‘“I put you in all my dreams, Portuga. When I head out over the green prairies  with  Tom  Mix  and  Fred  Thompson,  I’ve  already  hired  a stagecoach for you to travel in so you don’t get tired. You’re everywhere I go. Sometimes at school I look up and imagine you’ve come to wave at me from the door.”
	‘“Goodness me! I’ve never seen a soul as starved for affection as you.But you shouldn’t be so attached to me, you know?”’
	I was telling all this to Pinkie. Pinkie liked to talk more than I did.
	‘But  the  truth  is,  after  he  became  my  father,  Sweetie,  he’s  been  all doting. He thinks everything I do is cute. But a different cute. He’s not like  other  people  who  say,  “That  boy’ll  go  far.  He’ll  go  far,  but  he’ll never leave Bangu.”’
	I gave Pinkie a tender look. Now that I’d discovered what tenderness was, I lavished it on everything that I liked.
	‘You  see,  Pinkie,  I  want  to  have  twelve  children  and  then  twelve more.  Do  you  understand?  The  first  lot  will  all  be  children  and  no one will ever lay a finger on them. The other twelve will grow into men. And I’ll  go  and  ask  each  of  them,  “What  do  you  most  want  to  be,  son?  A wood cutter? Right, then. Here’s an axe and a chequered shirt. You want to be a lion tamer? Well, here’s a whip and a uniform.”’
	‘What  about  at  Christmas?  What  are you  going  to  do with  so  many children?’
	Pinkie was really something! Interrupting at a time like that.
	‘At Christmas I’m going to have lots of money. I’ll buy a truckload of nuts and chestnuts and hazelnuts. Walnuts, figs and raisins. So many toys that they’ll give or lend them to our poor neighbours … And I’m going tohave lots of money, because from now on I want to be rich, really rich,and I’m going to win the lottery too …’
	I  looked  at  Pinkie  defiantly,  to  show  that  I  wasn’t  happy  about  his interruption.
	‘Let me finish telling you the rest ’cause there are lots of children to go.  “So,  son,  you  want  to  be  a  cowboy?  Here’s  your  saddle  and lasso. You want to drive the Mangaratiba? Here’s your cap and whistle …”’
	‘Why  a  whistle,  Zezé?  You  talk  to  yourself  so  much,  you’ll  end  upgoing crazy.’
	Totoca had come over to sit by me. With a friendly smile, he studied my orange tree, covered in string and beer caps. He wanted something.
	‘Zezé, do you want to lend me four tostões?’
	‘No.’
	‘But you have it, don’t you?’
	‘Yep.’
	‘And you  don’t  want  to  lend  it  to  me  even  though  you  don’t  know what it’s for?’
	‘I’m going to become very rich so I can travel to Trás-os-Montes.’
	‘What’s all this about?’
	‘Not telling.’
	‘Well, keep it to yourself, then.’
	‘I will but I’m not lending you four tostões.’
	‘You’re  good  at marbles.  You’re  a  good shot.  Tomorrow you’ll  play and  win  more  marbles  to  sell.  You’ll  get  your  four  tostões  back  in  notime.’
	‘It doesn’t matter, I won’t lend it to you and don’t come here to pick a fight with me, ’cause I’m behaving myself and not up to any mischief.’
	‘I’m not here to pick a fight. It’s just that you’re my favourite brother,and now all of a sudden you’re becoming a heartless monster.’
	‘I’m not becoming a heartless monster. I’m a heartless troglodyte.’
	‘What’s that?’
	‘Troglodyte.  Uncle  Edmundo  showed  me  a  picture  in  a  magazine. They were big, hairy monkeys with clubs. Troglodytes were people at the beginning  of  the  world  who  lived  in  the  caves  of  Nean  …  Ne-an  …  I don’t know.  I  can’t remember  the  name  because  it was  foreign  and  too difficult.’
	‘Uncle Edmundo shouldn’t fill your head with so many ideas. But will you lend it to me?’
	‘I don’t even know if I have it …’
	‘C’mon, Zezé, how many times have we gone out to shine shoes and you didn’t make a thing and I shared what I made with you? How many times have I carried your box when you were tired …?’
	It was true. Totoca was rarely mean to me. I knew I’d end up lending it to him.
	‘If you lend it to me, I’ll tell you two really good things.’
	I was silent.
	‘And I’ll say that your sweet-orange tree is much more beautiful than my tamarind tree.’
	‘Really?’
	‘That’s what I said.’
	I put my hand in my pocket and shook my coins.
	‘What else?’
	‘You know, Zezé, we’re not going to be poor any more. Father got a job as a manager at Santo Aleixo Factory. We’re going to be rich again… What’s wrong? Aren’t you happy?’
	‘Yes,  I’m happy for Father. But I  don’t want to leave  Bangu. I’ll go live with Gran. I’m only leaving here to go to Trás-os-Montes …’
	‘Right. You’d rather stay with Gran and take laxatives once a month than go with us?’
	‘Yep. And you’ll never know why … What’s the other thing?’
	‘I can’t tell you here. There’s “someone” who can’t hear it.’
	We walked over to the out house. Even so, he spoke in a low voice.
	‘I need to warn you, Zezé. So you can get used to the idea. City Hallis  planning  to  make  the  streets  wider.  They’re  going  to  fill  in  all  the ditches and take space from all the backyards.’
	‘So what?’
	‘You’re such a  bright spark and you didn’t get it? When they widen the streets they’re going to tear all that down.’
	He pointed at the place where my sweet-orange tree stood. I puckered up to cry.
	‘You’re lying, aren’t you, Totoca?’
	‘You don’t need to make that face. It’s still a long way off.’
	My fingers were nervously counting the coins in my pocket.
	‘It’s a lie, isn’t it, Totoca?’
	‘No. It’s the honest-to-God truth. But are you a big boy or not?’
	‘I am.’
	The tears streamed down my face anyway. I hugged him around the waist, begging.
	‘You’re with me, aren’t you, Totoca? I’m going to round up a lot of people to make war. No one’s chopping down my little orange tree.’
	‘OK, fine. We won’t let them. Now will you lend me the money?’
	‘What’s it for?’
	‘Since  you  were  banned  from  the  Cinema  Bangu,  they  started showing a Tarzan film. I’ll tell you all about it when I’ve seen it.’
	I found five tostões in my pocket and handed him the money while I dried my eyes with the bottom of my shirt.
	‘Keep the change. You can buy some sweets.’
	I  went  back  to  my  orange  tree,  but  I  didn’t  feel  like  talking.  I  just thought about the Tarzan film. I’d seen it the day before.
	‘Do you want to go?’ Portuga had asked when I told him about it.
	‘I’d love to, but I’m not allowed in the Cinema Bangu.’
	I reminded him why. He laughed.
	‘Is that head of yours making things up?’
	‘I  swear,  Portuga.  But  I  think  if  a  grown-up  went  with  me,  no  one would say anything.’
	‘And if this grown-up were me … Is that what you want?’
	My face lit up with happiness.
	‘But I have to work, son.’
	‘There’s  never  anyone  there  at  this  time.  Instead  of  chatting  or napping in the car, you could see Tarzan fighting leopards, alligators and gorillas. Do you know who plays Tarzan? Frank Merrill.’
	But he still wasn’t sure.
	‘You little rascal. You’ve a ruse for everything.’
	‘It’s only two hours. You’re already very rich, Portuga.’
	‘Let’s go, then. But let’s walk there. I’m going to leave my car parked right here.’
	And  we  went.  But  the  girl  at  the  ticket  counter  said  she  had  strict orders not to let me in for one year.‘I’ll  be  responsible  for  him.  That  was  before.  He  knows  how  to behave now.’
	The ticket girl looked at me and I smiled at her. I planted a kiss on the tips of my fingers and blew it to her.
	‘Look here, Zezé. If you get up to anything, I’ll lose my job.’
	I’d  been  keeping  our  trip  to  the  cinema  a  secret  from  Pinkie,  but  I could never keep anything from him for long.



Chapter Seven
THE MANGARATIBA


When  Dona  Cecília  Paim  asked  if  anyone  wanted  to  come  up  to  the blackboard  to  write  a  sentence  they  had  made  up  themselves,  no  one dared. But I thought of something and put my hand up.
	‘Want to come up here, Zezé?’
	As I stood and walked to the blackboard, I was proud to hear her say,‘See? The youngest member of class.’
	I couldn’t even reach halfway up the blackboard. I took the chalk and wrote  in  my  best  handwriting:  There  are  only  a  few  days  left  until  the holidays. I  looked  at  Dona  Cecília  Paim  to  see  if  I’d  made  a  mistake.  She smiled happily and on her desk was the empty cup. Empty, but with an imaginary rose in it, as she had said.
	I returned to my desk, happy with my sentence. Happy because, come the holidays, I was going to see Portuga a lot.
	Then others put up their hands, wanting to write sentences. But I was the hero.
	Someone asked if they could come in. They were running late. It was Jerônimo. He came bumbling in and sat directly behind me. He plonked his books down noisily and said something to the person next to him. I didn’t pay much attention. I wanted to study to be wise. But one word in the whispered conversation caught my attention. They were talking about the Mangaratiba.
	‘It hit the car?’‘Manuel Valadares’s car. That beautiful one.’
	I swung around in shock.
	‘What did you say?’
	‘I said the Mangaratiba hit the Portuguese’s car on the crossing at Ruada Chita. That’s why I’m late. The train crushed the car. There’s a huge crowd there. They even called the Realengo Fire Brigade.’
	I broke into a  cold sweat and it  felt like everything was  about to go black. Jerônimo continued answering his neighbour’s questions.
	‘I don’t know if he’s dead. They wouldn’t let children anywhere near it.’
	Without realising it, I stood up. I felt a terrible need to throw up and my body  was  covered in  cold  sweat. I  left  my desk  and  headed for  the door.  I  barely  even  registered  the  face  of  Dona  Cecília  Paim,  who  had come to intercept me. Perhaps she’d seen the colour drain from my face.
	‘What’s wrong, Zezé?’
	But  I  couldn’t  answer.  Tears  were  welling  in  my  eyes.  Then something  snapped  and  I  bolted,  without  even  thinking  about  the headmistress’s office. I reached the street and forgot about the highway, about everything. I just wanted to run and run until I got there. My hear thurt  more  than  my  stomach  and  I  ran  the  length  of  Rua  das  Casinhas without stopping. I got to the pastry shop and glanced about at the cars tosee if Jerônimo  was lying.  But our  car wasn’t there. I let  out a  cry and started running again. I was caught by Seu Ladislau’s strong arms.
	‘Where’re you going, Zezé?’
	My face was wet with tears.
	‘There.’
	‘You don’t have to.’
	I struggled like crazy, but couldn’t free myself.
	‘Calm down, son. I won’t let you go.’
	‘So the Mangaratiba did kill him …’
	‘No. The ambulance has come already. It just wrecked the car.’
	‘You’re lying, Seu Ladislau.’
	‘Why would I lie? Didn’t I tell you the train hit the car? So, when he’s allowed to have visitors at the hospital, I’ll take you, I promise. Now let’s go have a soda.’
	He took a handkerchief and wiped away my sweat.‘I’m going to be a little sick.’ 
	I leaned against the wall and he held my head.
	‘Feeling better, Zezé?’
	I nodded.
	‘I’ll take you home, OK?’
	I shook my head and began to walk slowly away, in a daze. I knew the truth. The  Mangaratiba  was  merciless.  It  was  the  strongest  train  there was. I  threw up  a  few more  times and  I  could  see  that no  one paid  the slightest  attention.  I  had  no  one  left  in  the  world.  I  didn’t  go  back  toschool and just followed my heart. I sniffed from time to time and dried my face  on my  school  uniform. I’d  never see  my Portuga again.  Never again. He  was  gone.  I  walked  and  walked.  I  stopped  at  the  road  wherehe’d let me call him Portuga and let me piggyback on his car. I sat at the base of a tree trunk and curled up, face on my knees.
	Suddenly I blurted out, ‘You’re mean, Baby Jesus. I thought you were going to be good to me this time and you go and do this? Why don’t you like me as much as the other boys? I’ve been good. I haven’t fought, I’ve done  my  homework,  I’ve  stopped  swearing.  I  even  stopped  saying“bum”. Why have you done this to me, Baby Jesus? They’re going to cut down my orange tree and I didn’t even get upset about it. I only cried a little bit … But now … now …’
	My outburst surprised me. A new flood of tears.
	‘I  want  my  Portuga  back,  Baby  Jesus.  You  have  to  give  me  my Portuga back.’
	Then  a  very soft,  very  sweet  voice  spoke  to  my  heart. It  must  have been the friendly voice of the tree I was sitting under.
	‘Don’t cry, child. He’s in heaven.’
	When  it  was  almost  dark,  Totoca  found  me  sitting  on  Dona  Helena Villas-Boas’s doorstep, drained of all strength, unable to throw up or cry any more.
	He spoke to me, but all I could do was moan.
	‘What’s wrong, Zezé? Talk to me.’
	I  just  kept  moaning  in  a  low  voice.  Totoca  put  his  hand  on  my forehead.
	‘You’re  burning  up  with  fever.  What’s  going  on,  Zezé?  Come  withme, let’s go home. I’ll help you, we’ll go slow.’
	I managed to speak between moans.
	‘Forget it, Totoca. I’m not going back to that house.’
	‘Yes, you are. It’s our house.’
	‘There’s nothing left for me there. It’s all over.’
	He tried to help me up, but he saw that I didn’t have the strength.
	He  wrapped  my  arms  around  his  neck  and  carried  me  in  his  arms.
When we got home, he laid me down on the bed.
	‘Jandira! Glória! Where is everyone?’
	He went to find Jandira, who was chatting with Alaíde at her house.
	‘Jandira, Zezé’s really sick.’
	She came, grumbling.
	‘He must be up to something. A few good smacks with a flip-flop …’
	But Totoca had walked nervously into the bedroom.
	‘No, Jandira. This time he’s really sick and he’s going to die.’

* * *

For three days and three nights, I didn’t want a thing. I was burning up with fever and threw up every time they tried to give me something to eat or  drink.  I  was  wasting  away.  I just  lay  there  motionless,  staring  at  the wall for hours on end.
	I heard people around me talking. I understood everything they said, but I didn’t want to answer. I didn’t want to talk. All I could think about was going to heaven. 
	Glória changed rooms and spent the nights by my side. She wouldn’t let anyone turn off the light. Everyone treated me with kid gloves. Even Gran came to spend a few days with us.
	Totoca  spent  hours  and  hours  with  me,  eyes  bulging,  talking  from time to time.
	‘It’s  not  true,  Zezé.  Honestly.  It  was  all  a  lie.  They’re  not  going  to widen the streets or anything …’
	The house was cloaked in silence as if death walked in silk slippers. No one made any noise. They all spoke quietly. Mother spent almost the entire night with me. But I couldn’t forget him. His laughter. His way of talking.  Even  the  crickets  outside  imitated  the  kechah,  kechah  of  him shaving. I couldn’t stop thinking about him. Now I really knew what pain was. Pain wasn’t being beaten unconscious. It wasn’t cutting my foot on a shard of glass and getting stitches at the pharmacy. Pain was this: my whole  heart  ached,  and  I  had  to  carry  it  to  the  grave.  I  couldn’t  tell anyone  my  secret.  Pain  sapped  the  strength  from my  arms,  my  head;  I didn’t even want to turn my head on the pillow.
	And it only got worse. I was skin and bones. They called the doctor. Dr Faulhaber came and examined me. It didn’t take him long to figure it out.
	‘It’s shock. He’s deeply traumatised. He’ll only survive if he is able toget over it.’
	Glória took the doctor outside and told him.
	‘He  has  had  a  shock,  sir.  He’s  been  like  this  ever  since  he  heard they’re planning to cut down his orange tree.’
	‘Then you need to convince him that it isn’t true.’
	‘We’ve tried everything, but he won’t believe us. To him, the tree is a person. He’s an odd boy. Very sensitive and precocious.’
	I  overheard  it  all  but  I  still  didn’t  want  to  live.  I  wanted  to  go  to heaven and no one went there alive.
	They bought medicine, but I kept on throwing up.
	That was when something beautiful happened. Everyone in the street started coming to visit me. They forgot that I was the devil in carnate. Seu Misery  and  Hunger  came  and  brought  me  a  marshmallow.  Eugênia brought me eggs and prayed over my belly so I would stop throwing up.
	‘Seu Paulo’s son is dying.’
	They said nice things to me.
	‘You need to get better, Zezé. The street’s so sad without you and your mischief.’
	Dona Cecília Paim came to see me, with my satchel and a flower. It just made me start crying all over again.
	She said I’d left the classroom and that was the last she’d heard of me.
	But  it  was  really  sad  when  Seu  Ariovaldo  came  to  see  me.  I recognised his voice and pretended to be asleep.
	‘You can wait outside until he wakes up.’
	He sat down and said to Glória, 
	‘Listen, ma’am, I went along asking everyone where he lived until I found the house.’
	He sniffed loudly.
	‘My little saint can’t die. Don’t let him, ma’am. It was you he brought my brochures to, wasn’t it?’
	Glória was barely able to reply.
	‘Don’t let the lil’ critter die, ma’am. If anything happens to him, I’ll never come to this godforsaken part of town again.’
	When he came into the room, he sat next to the bed and pressed my hand to his face.
	‘Look  here,  Zezé.  You  need  to  get  good  and  come  sing  again.  I’ve barely sold a thing. Everyone says, “Hey, Ariovaldo, where’s your little canary?” Promise you’re going to get good, promise?’
	My eyes filled with tears and Glória, seeing that I was upset again, led Seu Ariovaldo away.

* * *

I started to improve. I was able to swallow things and keep them down. But  whenever  I  remembered,  the  fever  would  come  back  higher  than ever,  along  with  the  throwing  up.  Sometimes  I  saw  the  Mangaratiba hurtling  along  and  crushing  him.  I  couldn’t  help  it.  I  prayed  to  BabyJesus, if he cared about me at all, that he hadn’t felt anything.
	Glória would come and stroke my head.
	‘Don’t  cry,  shrimp.  It’ll  all  pass.  If  you  want,  my  mango  tree  is  allyours. No one’s going to do anything to it.’
	But what was I going to do with a toothless old mango tree that didn’t even bear fruit any more? Even my orange tree would soon lose its charm and become a tree like any other … That’s if they gave the poor thing a chance.
	How easy it was for some to die. A cruel train just had to come alongand that was it. And how hard it was for me to get to heaven. Everyone was holding onto my legs so I couldn’t go.
	Glória’s  kindness  and  devotion  managed  to  get  me  talking  a  little. Even Father stopped going out at night. Totoca lost so much weight out of remorse that Jandira gave him a scolding.
	‘Isn’t one sickly person enough, Totoca?’
	‘You’re not in my shoes to feel what I’m feeling. I was the one who told him.  I  can still  feel it  in my  stomach, even  when I’m  sleeping, hisface, crying and crying.’
	‘Now don’t you go crying too. You’re a big boy and he’s going to pull through.  Now  chin  up  and  go  buy  me  a  can  of  condensed  milk  at  the Misery and Hunger.’
	‘Then give me the money ’cause he won’t keep a tab for Father anymore.’
	My weakness  made  me  constantly  sleepy.  I no  longer  knew  when  it was  day  or  night.  The  fever  would  ease  a  little  and  my  tremors  and agitation would let up. I would open my eyes and, in the semi-darkness, there  would  be  Glória,  who  never  left  my  side.  She  had  brought  the rocking chair into the room and often fell asleep in it, she was so tired.
	‘Gló, is it afternoon already?’
	‘Almost, my love.’
	‘Do you want to open the window?’
	‘Won’t it make your head hurt?’
	‘I don’t think so.’
	The light came in and I could see a sliver of beautiful sky. I took one look at it and started to cry again.
	‘What’s the matter, Zezé? The Baby Jesus made such a beautiful blue sky for you. He told me so today …’
	Gloria didn’t know that the sky reminded me of heaven.
	She leaned over, took my hands in hers and tried to cheer me up. Herface was tired and thin.
	‘Look,  Zezé,  soon  you’ll  be  better.  Flying  kites,  winning  a  heap  of marbles, climbing trees, riding Pinkie. I want to see you back to your old self,  singing  songs,  bringing  me  lyrics.  So  many  beautiful  things.  See how sad the street is lately? Everyone misses the life and cheer you bring to it. But you have to help. Live, live and live.’
	‘But I don’t want to any more, Gló. If I get better, I’ll be bad again. You don’t understand. I don’t have anyone to be good for any more.’
	‘Well  you  don’t  need  to  be  that  good.  Be  a  boy,  be  the  child  you always were.’
	‘What for, Gló? So everyone can hit me again? So everyone can treat me badly?’
	She  took  my  face  between  her  fingers  and  said  resolutely,  ‘Look, shrimp.  I  promise  you  one  thing.  When  you  get  better,  no  one,  but  noone, not even God, is going to lay a finger on you. They’d have to stepover my cold cadaver first! Do you believe me?’
	I nodded.
	‘What’s a cadaver?’
	For  the  first  time,  Glória’s  face  lit  up  with  happiness.  She  laughed, because she knew that if I was interested in difficult words I had regained my will to live.
	‘A cadaver’s a dead body, a corpse. But maybe we should change the subject now.’
	I thought it was a good idea, too, but I couldn’t help but think that hehad been a cadaver for several days now. Glória kept talking, promising things, but now I was thinking about Portuga’s two little birds, the blue one and the canary. What would become of them? They might have died of sadness  like  Orlando-Hair-on-Fire’s  finch. Maybe  someone  had opened the  cage  doors  and  set  them  free.  But  that  would  have  meant certain death. They didn’t know how to fly any more. They would sit in the  orange  trees  until  the  children  hit  them  with  their slingshots. When Zico couldn’t afford to keep the tanager aviary going, he had opened the doors and that’s what happened. Not one escaped.
	Things  began  to  return  to  normal  in  the  house.  There  was  noise everywhere. Mother went back to work. The rocking chair went back to the sitting room, where it had always lived. Only Glória stayed put. Sh ewasn’t going to budge until she saw me standing again.
	‘Have this soup, shrimp. Jandira killed the black chicken just to make this soup for you. See how nice it smells.’
	And she would blow on the spoon.
	If  you  like,  dunk  your  bread  in  the  coffee  like  this.  But  don’t  slurp when you take a sip. It’s bad manners.
	‘Hey,  what’s  going  on,  shrimp?  Don’t  tell  me  you’re  going  to  crybecause  the  black  chicken  is  dead.  She  was  old.  So  old  she  didn’t  lay eggs any more.’
	So you managed to find out where I live.
	‘I know she was  the black panther  at the zoo, but  we’ll buy another black panther, much wilder than her.’
	So, where’ve you been all this time?
	‘Not now, Gló. If I eat it, I’ll start throwing up.’
	‘If I give it to you later, will you have it?’
	And before I could stop myself I blurted out, ‘I promise to be good, Iwon’t fight, I won’t use swear words, not even “bum”. But I always want to be with you.’
	They gave me worried looks, thinking I was talking to Pinkie again.

* * *

In  the  beginning  it  was  just  a  rustling  at  the  window,  but  after  that  it turned into knocking. A gentle voice came from outside.
	‘Zezé!’
	I got up and leaned my head against the shutter.
	‘Who is it?’
	‘It’s me. Open up.’I  unlatched  it  without  making  any  noise  so  as  not  to  wake  Glória. Standing there in the darkness was Pinkie, all shiny and festooned with gold, like a miracle.
	‘May I come in?’
	‘I guess so. But don’t make any noise or she’ll wake up.’
	‘I promise not to wake her.’
	He jumped into the room and I went back to bed.
	‘Look who I brought to see you. He insisted on coming too.’
	He held out his arm and I saw a kind of silver bird.
	‘I can’t see properly, Pinkie.’
	‘Pay attention because you’re going to get a surprise. I dressed him upwith silver feathers. Isn’t he beautiful?’
	‘Luciano!  How  fine  you  look.  You  should  stay  like  that  for  ever.  I thought you were a falcon from The Tale of Caliph Stork.’
	I stroked his head, overcome with emotion, and felt for the first time that it was soft and that even bats liked tenderness.
	‘You missed something. Take a good look.
	’Pinkie turned around to show himself off.
	‘I’m wearing Tom Mix’s spurs. Ken Maynard’s hat. Fred Thompson’s pistols.  Richard  Talmadge’s  belt  and  boots.  And  to  top  it  off,  Seu Ariovaldo lent me that chequered shirt you like so much.’
	‘I’ve never seen anything more beautiful, Pinkie. How did you get it all?
	’‘When they heard you weren’t well, they lent it to me.’
	‘It’s a shame you can’t dress like that all the time.’
	I studied Pinkie, worried that he might know what awaited him. But I didn’t say anything.
	He  sat  on  the  edge  of  the  bed  and  his  eyes  were  all  sweetness  and concern. He leaned in close.
	‘What’s wrong, Sweetie?’ he said.
	‘But you’re Sweetie, Pinkie.’
	‘Well, then  you’re Sweetie Junior. Can’t I be a really good friend to you, as you are to me?’
	‘Don’t say that. The doctor told me not to cry.
	’‘I don’t want that either. I came because I really miss you and I wantto see you well and happy again. Everything in life passes. And to prove it, I’ve come to take you for a ride. Let’s go?’
	‘I’m very weak.’
	‘A little fresh air will cure you. I’ll help you jump out the window.’
	And we left.
	‘Where are we going?’
	‘Let’s go for a walk on the water pipes.’
	‘But  I  don’t  want  to  go  down  Rua  Barão  de  Capanema.  I’m  never going there again.’
	‘Let’s take Rua dos Açudes right to the end.’
	Pinkie  had  transformed  into  a  flying  horse.  Luciano  was  perched happily on my shoulder.
	When we got there,  Pinkie gave me  his hand to help  me balance on the thick pipes. It was nice when there was a hole and the water squirted up like a little fountain, wetting us and tickling the soles of my feet. I felt a little dizzy, but the joy that Pinkie was giving me made me feel as if I was better already. At least, my heart was lighter.
	Suddenly, I heard a whistle in the distance.
	‘Did you hear that, Pinkie?’
	‘It’s a train whistle, far away.’
	But a strange noise grew closer and closer and new whistles pierced the silence. The horror hit me all at once.
	‘It’s the train, Pinkie. The Mangaratiba. The murderer!’
	And the sound of the wheels on the tracks grew, frighteningly.
	‘Climb up here, Pinkie. Quickly, Pinkie.’
	Pinkie  couldn’t  keep  his  balance  on  the  pipe  because  of  the  shiny spurs.
	‘C’mon, Pinkie, give me your hand. It wants to kill you. It wants  to kill you. It wants to crush you. It wants to chop you up.’
	Pinkie  had  barely  climbed  onto  the  pipe,  when  the  wicked  train charged past, whistling and blowing out steam.
	‘Murderer! Murderer!’
But the train continued speeding over the tracks. Its voice came to us between fits of laughter.
	‘It wasn’t my fault … It wasn’t my fault … It wasn’t my fault … It wasn’t my fault …’
	All  the  lights  in  the  house  came  on  and  my  room  was  invaded  by sleepy-eyed faces.
	‘It was a nightmare.’ 
	Mother took me in her arms, trying to quell my sobs against her chest.‘It was just a dream, son … A bad dream.’
	I began to throw up again while Glória told Lalá what had happened.‘I woke up to him shouting “murderer”. He was talking about killing, crushing, chopping … My God, when is all this going to end?’

* * *

But  a  few  days  later  it  ended.  I  was  condemned  to  go  on  living  and living.  One  morning,  Glória  came  in,  radiant.  I  was  sitting  up  in  bed, feeling sad about life.
	‘Look, Zezé.’
	In her hands was a tiny white flower.
	‘It’s  Pinkie’s  first  blossom.  Soon  he’ll  be  a  grown-up  tree  and  bear fruit.’
	I  sat  there  stroking  the  little  white  flower.  I  wouldn’t  cry  over anything  any  more.  Although  Pinkie  was  trying  to  say  goodbye  to  me with that flower, he had already left the world of my dreams for the world of my reality and pain.
	‘Now let’s have some porridge and walk around the house a little like you did yesterday. Come soon, OK?’
	That was when King Luís climbed onto my bed. He was allowed near me now. At first they hadn’t wanted him to get upset.
	‘Zezé!’
	‘What, my little king?’
	He  was  the  only  true  king.  The  others,  the  King  of  Diamonds,  theKing  of  Hearts,  the  King  of  Clubs  and  the  King  of  Spades,  were  just figures soiled by the fingers that played them. But he wouldn’t live to siton a throne.
	‘Zezé, I love you.’
	‘I love you too, little brother.’
	‘Do you want to play with me today?’
	‘Yes, I’ll play with you today. What do you want to do?’
	‘I want to go to the zoo, and then to Europe. Then I want to go to the Amazon jungle and play with Pinkie.’
	‘If I don’t get too tired, we can do it all.’
	After  breakfast,  as  Glória  looked  on  happily,  we  went  down  to  theback of the yard holding hands. Glória leaned in the doorway, relieved. Before we reached the chicken coop, I turned and waved at her. Her eyes glowed  with  happiness.  And  I,  with  my  strange  precociousness, sensed what she was feeling in her heart: ‘He’s gone back to his dream world, thank God!’
	‘Zezé?’
	‘Yes?’
	‘Where’s the black panther?’
	It was hard to go back to playing the same old games now that I didn’t believe  in  such things  any  more.  I  felt  like  saying:  ‘There  never  was  a black panther, silly. It was just an old black hen, which I ate in a soup.’
	But  I  said,  ‘There  are  only  two  lions  left,  Luís.  The  black  panther went on a vacation to the Amazon jungle.’
	Best to preserve his illusions as much as possible. When I was little, I believed those things too.
	The little king opened his eyes wide.
	‘In that jungle, over there?’
	‘Don’t be afraid. She went so far that she’ll never be able to find herway back.’
	I smiled bitterly. The Amazon jungle was just half a dozen thorny and hostile orange trees.
	‘You know, Luís, I’m feeling weak, I need to go back in. We’ll play more tomorrow. Cable cars and whatever else you want.’
	He nodded and slowly followed me back to the house. He was still too young to know the truth. I didn’t want to go anywhere near the ditch or the Amazon river. I didn’t want to see Pinkie with his spell broken. Luís didn’t know that the tiny white flower had been our goodbye.



Chapter Eight
MANY ARE THE OLD TREES


The news was confirmed before nightfall. Apparently peace was to reign once again over our home and family.
	Father took me by the hand and sat me on his lap in front of everyone. He rocked the chair slowly so I wouldn’t get dizzy.
	‘It’s  all over, son.  Everything. One day you’ll  be a father  and you’llsee how difficult certain moments in a man’s life are. Nothing seems togo  right,  and  you  feel  a  desperation  that’s  never-ending.  But  not  anymore. I’ve been made a manager at the Santo Aleixo Factory. Your shoes will never be empty at Christmas again.’
	He paused.  He would  never forget that Christmas  for the  rest of  hislife.
	‘We’re going to travel a lot. Mother won’t need to work any more, or your sisters. Do you still have the medallion with the Indian on it?’
	I rummaged in my pocket and found it.
	‘Well, I’m going to buy a new watch and put the medallion on it. Oneday it will be yours.’
	Portuga, do you know what carborundum is?
	Father talked and talked.
	His stubble rubbing against my face bothered me. The smell coming from his well-worn shirt gave me goosebumps. I slipped off his knee and went to the kitchen door. I sat on the steps and gazed at the backyard asthe light faded. My heart protested without anger. ‘Who is this man who puts  me  on  his  knee?  He  isn’t  my  father.  My  father  is  dead.  The Mangaratiba killed him.’
	Father had followed me and saw that my eyes were full of tears again.
	He practically knelt to speak to me.
	‘Don’t  cry,  son.  We’re  going  to  have  a  big  house.  A  real  river  runs right behind it. There are big trees, lots of them, and they’ll all be yours. You can make swings and hang them there.’He didn’t understand. 
	He didn’t understand. No tree could ever be as beautiful as Queen Carlota.
	‘You’ll have first pick of the trees.’
	I looked at his feet, his toes poking out of his sandals. He was an old tree with dark roots. He was a tree-father. But a tree I barely knew.
	‘That’s  not  all.  They’re  not  going  to  cut  down  your  orange  tree  so soon. And when they do, you’ll be far away and won’t even feel it.’
	I clung to his knees, sobbing.
	‘It’s no use, Father. It’s no use …’
	And  looking  at  his  face,  which  was  also  streaked  with  tears,  I mumbled like a dead man, ‘It’s gone, Father. My sweet-orange tree was cut down over a week ago.’



Last Chapter
FINAL CONFESSION


The years have passed, my dear Manuel Valadares. I am forty-eight years old now and sometimes I miss you so much I feel like I am still a child. Iimagine  that  at  any  moment  you’ll  appear  with  trading  cards  and marbles. It was you who taught me what tenderness is, my dear Portuga. Today  I  am  the  one  who  tries  to  hand  out  marbles  and  trading  cards,because life without tenderness isn’t very special. Sometimes I am happy in  my  tenderness,  and  sometimes  I  think  I’m  kidding  myself,  which  is more common.
	Back then. Back in our time, I didn’t know that many years earlier, an idiot prince had knelt before an altar and asked the saints, his eyes full of tears:

		‘Why do they tell little children so much so young?’

	The truth, my dear Portuga, is that they told me things way too soon. Farewell!
										      						   Ubatuba, 1967